# 10 Nov 2022

Created at: November 10, 2022 2:57 PM

- [[Endochondral ossification]]
- [[Epiphyseal plate]]

- [[Bone repair]]
    - Bone repair occurs after injury to a bone, i.e. fracture, and initiated with inflammation
    - Inflammation stage is followed by formation of granulation tissue, and migration of fibroblast and messenchymal tissues
    - The messenchymal tissues form a fibrous and cartilaginous callus, and via endochondral ossification, forms primary bone.
    - Subsequent remodelling of primary bone into secondary bone to original bone shape.
- [[Bone matrix]]
    - The bone matrix is a mixed matrix consisting of 70% of inorganic matrix and 30% of organic matrix.
    - The inorganic matrix consist of mainly calcium hydroxyapatite crystals,
    - The organic matrix mainly consist of 90% type 1 collagen, that gives bones its high tensile strength. It is also necessary for Biomineralization of bone.
    - Some proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans are present: Decorin, biglycan, fibromodulin, hyaluronan
    - Glycoproteins (all negatively charged) are present to regulate [[Biomineralization of bone]]:
        - Osteocalcin and matrix: consist of gamma-carboxyglutamic acid
        - Osteopontin - stretches of aspartate residues
        - Bone sialoprotein - stretches of glutamic residues
    - These negatively charged glycoproteins attract positively charged Ca2+, and thus raises local Ca2+ levels that is necessary for biomineralization of bone
    - Alkaline phosphatase activity of the osteoblast raises phosphate levels
- Chondrocytes synthesize pericellular, territorial and inter-territorial matrix
    - Pericellular matrix is contributed by one cell
    - Territorial matrix is contributed predominantly by one cell
    - Interterritorial matrix is contributed by more than 1 cell
- [[Cartilage matrix]]
    - 3 components: Insoluble fibres - Type 2 collagen (45%), soluble fibres (Proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans) (45%), glycoproteins
    - A mixture of tensile strength and compressive resistance offered by the components
        - Soluble fibres
            - Glycosaminoglycan - A linear polymer with a repeating dissacharide subunit. One subunit is either N-acetylglucosamine or N-acetylgalactosamine, the other is D-glucuronic acid or L-iduronic acid.
                - Hydroxyl groups of the amine sugars can be sulphated, enabling it to have an overall negative charge.
                - They may exist as a side chain in proteoglycans (Chondroitin sulphate, heparan sulphate, keratan sulphate, dermatan sulphate)
                - They may exist freely in hyaluronic acid
            - Proteoglycans - Consist of a core protein with one or more GAG side chains covalently attached (these GAG side chains, are much shorter than hyaluronan)
                - Two big groups:
                    - Large proteoglycans, Lecticans: Aggrecan, Brevican, Neurocan, Versicans - They consist of many GAG side chains covalently attached to it
                    - Small leucine repeat proteoglycans
                        - Decorin, Biglycan, Lumicans 1,2,4, GAG side chains only
            - GAGs side chains opperate as a larger fraction and provides biological functions
                - As the hydroxyl group of the amine sugars are highly sulphated, it has a predominant negative charge (sulphate groups), thus attracting cations, making it hydrophilic, providing swelling pressure that provides compressive resistance in cartilage, shock absorption
        
        - Adhesive glycoprotein in cartilage matrix
            - An important adhesive glycoprotein in cartilage matrix is fibronectin
            - Its functional form is a disulhide bonded dimer, which forms a fibrillar matrix that is further stabilised by extensive disulphide bonding
            - It binds to collagen, heparin sulphate proteoglycans, fibrin, at different domains.
            - Particularly binds to cell surfaces via integrin receptors at the RGD (Arginine-Glycine, Aspartate) motif.
        - ECM homeostasis - Cells synthesize ECM, with finite lifespan. Matrix turnover must be sensed by the cells to remodel ECM, achieving ECM homeostasis.
            - An imbalance in ECM homeostasis underlies degenerative disease, OA, IVD degeneration, osteoporosis
        - [[Enzymes involved in ECM turnover]]
            - MMPs are the key enzymes in matrix degradation
            - Classified into collagenase, gelatinase and stromolysin, which cleaves at specific sites of ECM proteins.
            - There is a high degree of regulation of such ECM
                - TIMPs
                - Secreted as inactive proenzymes, that requires cleavage of prodomain during activation
            - Other enzymesL
                - Hyalyronidase, chondroitinase,/ serine proteinase, elastase, cathepsins (less specific)
        - [[Degenerative change in intervertebral disc underlies disc herniation]] .
            - As we age, there is breakdown of HA-aggrecan aggregates, which cause it to hold less water.
            - The reduced swelling pressure, results in a loss of compressive resistance. Hence, upon compression, the nucleus pulposus will herniate through the annular fibrosis and impinge on nerve roots or into the spinal canal.