# 10 Oct 2022

Created at: October 10, 2022 10:05 AM

- [[Hip joint]]
    - The hip joint is the articulation between the head of the femur and the lunate surface of the acetabulum of the pelvic girdle
    - Classified as a ball and socket joint, but unlike the shoulder joint, it is designed for stability and weight bearing at the expense of motility.
    - The lunate surface of the acetabulum and the head of the femur (except for the fovea capitis is lined with hyaline cartilage.
    - The margins of the acetabulum is lined with fibrocartilage, the acetabular labrum, inferiorly, the acetabular labrum bridges across the acetabular notch as the tranverse acetabular ligament, which converts the notch into a foramen.
    - The ligamentum teres arises from the fovea capitis (deressed region on head of femur that is not lined with hyaline cartilage), and attaches to the transverse acetabulum ligament.
    - Joint capsule of the hip joint is much stronger than the joint capsule of the shoulder joint
        - Its proximal attachment is just outside the acetabular labrum and the transverse acetabular ligament, while its distal attachment is at the intertrochanteric line anteriorly and the neck of femur posteriorly, covering the proximal 2/3 of the neck, leaving 1/3 of the neck and its distal components outside the joint capsule (the intertrochanteric crest and quadrate tubercle is spared).
        - It is thickened at spirally arranged fibres:
            - Iliofemoral ligament, Pubofemoral ligament, ischiofemoral ligament
    - Bursas of the hip joint
        - Posteriorly, at the neck, synovial membrane herniates through the joint capsule to form a bursa of the obturator externus
        - Anteriorly, the iliopectineal bursa
    - Good stability due to the shape of articulating surfaces and the 3 ligaments
        - Most stable when hyperextended, as the ligaments are taut, holding the two articular surfaces together
        - Least stable when flexed and adducted, ligaments are laxed
        - Most easily dislocated posteriorly, endangers the sciatic nerve and may tear ligamentum teres and its artery (retinacular artery)- avascular necrosis of the femoral head.
    - Blood supply to femoral head
        - Medial and lateral circumflex femoral artery branches into the retinacular arteries, which pierce throuugh the joint capsules and run beneath the synovial membrane along the femoral neck (retinecula), then enter the femoral head (main supply)
        - Obuturator artery branches to give the Artery of the ligamentum teres (most important in children, obiterated in adults
        - Nutrient artery of femur (within the shaft of femur) not significant
    - Movement of the hip joint
        - Adduction and abduction
        - Flexion and extension
        - Lateral and medial rotation
        - Circumduction
- [[Knee joint]]
    - The knee joint is the largest synovial joint in the body, which includes a patellofemoral joint (a synovial plane joint), and the synovial condyloid joint (or modified hinge joint.
    - This joint is extremely complex, from its structure, stabilization, to its movement. Here is a quick summary/outline to give a simple understanding:
        - The knee joint consist of the patellofemoral joint (which function?) and the tibiofemoral joint, which enables the flexion and extension of the knee.
        - The tibiofemoral joint is the main topic discussed below.
        - A core concept is the change in structure of the femoral condyles when the knee flexes or extends: When flexed, the posterior surface of the femoral condyles, which is round, articulates with the tibial condyles, this enables movement like active rotation (tibia rotates with respect with the femur) when the knee joint is flexed, When extended, the inferior surface of the femoral condyles, which is flat, articulates with the tibial condyles.
        - A key structure is the fibrocartilgous menisci at the medial and lateral end of the articular surface, which accomodates to changes in shape of the articular surface during movement.
        - Stabilization of knee joint by its collateral ligament to prevent abduction and adduction of knee joint, this is classical to all hinge jont. Cruciate ligaments are also present to stabilze the knee joint
        - The knee joint is a weight bearing joint, which means it requires a locking, and subsequently an unlocking mechanism, that reduces energy required by the muscles to extend the knee.
    - Articular surface:
        - Articulation between the femoral condyles and the superior aspects of the tibial condyles
        - The surfaces of the femoral condyles that articulate with the tibia in flexion of the knee are curved or round, whereas the surfaces that articulate in full extension are flat
    - Knee joint synovial cavity and bursa
        - Very extensive with a number of bursas communicating with it
        - Suprapatellar bursa, prepatellar bursa, deep infrapatellar bursa and subcutaneous bursa
        - Subcutaneous bursa are prone to bursitis: prepatellar and infrapatellar (especially after kneeling a lot
    - Stabilization of the knee joint (very unstable due to incongruous articular surface
        - Stabilized by the muscle tone of quadriceps femoris most important dynamic stabilizing factor
        - 2 pairs of strong ligaments:
            - Cruciate ligaments maintain anteroposterior stability
                - The anterior cruciate ligament attaches to the anterior facet of the intercondylar area of the tibia, and ascends posteriorly to attach to lateral wall of the intercondylar fossa (lateral femoral condyle) - Prevents posterior displacement of femur relative to the tibia
                - The posterior cruciate ligament attaches to the posterior facet of the intercondylar area of the tibia and ascends anteriorly to attach to the medial wall of the intercondylar fossa (medial femoral condyle) - Prevents anterior displacement of the femur with respect to the tibia
            - Collateral ligament maintains side to side stability
                - Fibular collateral ligament (extrinsic ligament) is lateral to the joint - cord like, proximal atttachment at lateral femoral epicondyle distal at head of fibula
                - Tibial collateral ligament (intrinsic ligament), broad, proximal attachment at medial femoral epicondyle and distal at medial tibial condyle, and attaches to medial meniscus
    - Locking mechanism of the knee when extended - How the knee assumes a screw home position by rotation of the fibula
        - This is achieved in 2 mechanisms:
            - When extended, the articular surface of the femoral condyle becomes flat. It enables a larger surface area, making it more stable in extension.
            - Also, medial rotation of the fumur relative to the fibia tightens all associated ligaments - this is known as the screw home rotation during the last f=phase of extension.
        - This locks the knee.
        - The knee is unlocked by the lateral rotation of femur, mediated by the politeus muscle.
- [[Tibiofibular joint]]
    - Superior tibiofibular joint
        - Synovial plane joint between the head of the fibula and the lateral condyle of the tibia
        - Stabilized by anterior and posterior ligaments ofhead of fibula
    - The interosseous borders of the tibia and fibia are connected by the interoseous membrane
    - Distal tibiofibular joint is a fibrous joint (syndesmosis). This fibrous structure enables the formation of a notch like structure that partakes in the ankle joint.
    
    The distal end of the fibula is firmly anchored to the larger distal end of the tibia by strong ligaments. Together, the fibula and tibia create a deep bracket-shaped socket for the upper expanded part of the body of the talus:
    
    - ▪
        
        The roof of the socket is formed by the inferior surface of the distal end of the tibia.
        
    - ▪
        
        The medial side of the socket is formed by the medial malleolus of the tibia.
        
    - ▪
        
        The longer lateral side of the socket is formed by the lateral malleolus of the fibula.
        
    
    The articular surfaces are covered by hyaline cartilage.
    
- [[Ankle joint]]
    - The ankle joint is the articulation between the the tallus of the foot and the distal ends of the fibula and tibia
    - It is classified as a synovial hinge joint,enabling dorsiflexion and plantar flexion.
    - The ankle joint is more stable when dorsiflexed than plantar flexed, as when viewed above, the anterior part of tallus is wider than the posterior part, which that in dorsiflexion, the tallus fits tighter into the tibia and fibia
    - Stabilised by two ligaments: Medial ligaments and Lateral ligaments
    - Medial ligaments is a triangular ligament that attaches to the medial malleolus of the tibia, and can be subdivided into 4 parts by their distal attachment:
        - Plantar clacaneonavicular ligament (tibionavicular)
        - Tibiocalcanear ligament
        - Anterior tibiotalar ligament
        - Posterior tibiotalar lagament
    - Lateral ligaments consist of 3 ligaments:
        - Anterior talofibular
        - Posterior talofibular
        - Calcaneofibular
- [[Joints of the foot]]
    - [[Subtalar-talonavicular (STTN) complex]]
    - [[Ankle inversion and eversion injuries]]
    - [[Plantar ligaments that support the foot arches]]
- Guyton and Hall Ch29
    - Increased Bowman’s Capsule Hydrostatic Pressure Decreases Glomerular Filtration Rate
        - Direct measurements of hydrostatic pressure in Bowman’s capsule and at different points in the proximal tubule in experimental animals using micropipettes have suggested that a reasonable estimate for Bowman’s capsule pressure in humans is about 18 mm Hg under normal conditions. Increasing the hydrostatic pressure in Bowman’s capsule reduces GFR, whereas decreasing this pressure raises GFR. However, changes in Bowman’s capsule pressure normally do not serve as a primary means for regulating GFR.
    
    In certain pathological states associated with obstruction of the urinary tract, Bowman’s capsule pressure can increase markedly, causing serious reduction of GFR. For example, precipitation of calcium or of uric acid may lead to formation of stones that lodge in the urinary tract, often in the ureter, thereby obstructing outflow of the urinary tract and raising Bowman’s capsule pressure. This situation reduces GFR and eventually can cause  *hydronephrosis* (distention and dilation of the renal pelvis and calyces) and can damage or even destroy the kidney unless the obstruction is relieved.