# 12 Oct 2022

Created at: October 12, 2022 9:54 AM

- [[Drugs used in the treatment of enteric infections]]
    - Antibiotics can be classified by the sites it act on
    - Drugs that inhibit the action of cell wall synthesis
        - Beta-lactams - [[Penicillin]]  (formulated with Beta-lactamase inhibitors), [[Cephalosporins]] , Monobactams, Carbapenems
        - Non-betalactams - [[Vancomycin [[(Glycopeptide)]]]] , Bacitracin
    - Drugs that inhibit protein synthesis ([[Antibiotics that inhibit protein synthesis can be classified by spectrum]])
        - 30S inhibitors - Aminoglycosides, [[Tetracycline]]
        - 50S inhibitors - [[Macrolides]] , Clindamycin, Linezolid, Streptogramins, Chloramphenicol
    - Drugs that inhibit nucleic acid synthesis
        - [[Fluoroquinolones]] , [[Metronidazole]] ,[[Fidaxomicin]]
    - Drugs that inhibit folate synthesis
        - [[Cotrimoxazole]]  - a formulation of trimethroprim and sulfamethoxazole in a 1:5 ratio
- [[Osteoarthritis (Degenerative joint [[disorder)]]]]
    - Osteoarthritis (or degenerative joint disorder) refers to the progressive loss of articular cartilage, accompanied with the attempted repair of cartilage, remodelling and sclerosis of subcondral bone, formation of subchondral cysts and marginal osteophytes… This definition focuses on the pathology or lesions associated with Osteoarthritis.
    - I like the other definition more, as it includes the epidemiology and etiology of OA as well. Osteoarthritis is a common, age-related and heterogenous group of disorders characterised pathology by focal area of loss of articular cartilage in synovial joints, associated with variable degrees of osteophyte formation, subchondral bone change and synovitis.
    - Osteoarthritis can be classified by etiology:
        - Primary (idiopathic) osteoarthritis is defined as osteoarthritis that appears insiduously with no apparent initial cause, usually as an ageing phenomenon.
            - Joints affected usually involved, commonly in the hip joint and knee joint, Heberdon’s nodes (Bony swelling of the DIP joints in the hands), other synovial joints rarely, CMC joint of the thumb, etatarsophalangeal joint of the great toe, facet joints of the spine, elbows, shoulders.
        - When osteoarthritis occurs in a younger individual with apparent predisposing phenomenon, it is known as secondary arthritis.
    - Systemic factors
        - Age, sex, ethnicity, hormonal status, nutritional and metabolic factors, bone density
    - Local mechanical factors
        - Joint deformities and malalignments - Localisation of stress to a limited area on joint surface
        - Obesity and joint injury
        - Occupational factors
        - Sports
        - Muscle weakess
    - OA hip and knees
        - In Hong Kong, OA of the hips is relatively less common than western counterparts.
        - OA of the knee is relatively more common in Hong Kong (and Chinese population) relative to western countries. An explanation is genu varum (varus malalignment) being relatively common in this locality.
    - Pathoanatomy of OA
        - Articular cartilage damage (Loss of articular cartilage) as the major lesion: can be graded.
            - Grade 0 - Normal cartilage (Smooth surface with glistening white appearance)
            - Grade 1 - Cartilage becomes soft and swells (loss of smooth surface)
            - Grade 2 - Partial thickness defects with fibrillation (shredded appearance 絨毛) and fissures (depressions)
            - Grade 3 - Increase amounts of damage to the level of subchondral bone
            - Grade 4 - exposed subchondral bone or “eburnation”
        - Osteophyte formation
            - Bony formations as an ineffective physiological response to increase surface area.
            - Osteophyte formation underlies the stiffness.
        - Subchondral stenosis and cyst (Bones become denser, yet more brittle. Cracked surfaces enables the entry of fluid to give cysts.
    - Biochemical changes in osteoarthritis
        - Increase in water content, slow, progressive loss of proteoglycans
        - Change in arrangement and size of collagen fibres
    - Clinical features of osteoarthritis (natural course)
        - 3 symptoms and 3 signs
            - Persistant pain, limited morning stiffness, reduced function
            - Crepitus - palpable, sometimes audible during joint movements, Restricted ROM, Bony enlargement
        - American college of Rheumatology
            - 50 years old, < 30 min morning stiffness, Crepitus, Bony tenderness, Bony enlargement, no palpable warmth
    - Investigations in osteoarthritis
        - Straightforward cases of osteoarthritis can be delineated by symptomatology, but sometimes, other investigations are performed to rule out other pathologies.
        - Radiological assessment of OA - narrowing of joint space, osteophyte formation, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral cysts
        - MRI only whe suspect associated pathologies - Meniscal tear, Loos bodies, Bakers cyst
        - Blood test - CBC, ESR, CRP, Bone profile (Ca, PO4, Alkaline phosphatase), RF, ANA?
        - Joint aspiration to rule out gout or pseudogout - Clear straw colour, total cell count low , gram smear and culture negative crystals negative
    - [[Epidemiology and risk factors of Osteoarthritis]]
        - Osteoarthritis is the most common joint disorder, and is largely age related.