# 14 Oct 2022

Created at: October 14, 2022 5:51 PM

- Liver functions - Hepatocytes carry a long list of metabolic functions
    - Liver functions can be observed by the different functions carried out by organelles:
        - Mitochondria takes up 18% of cell volume. It is the site for oxidative phosphorylation and energy production. It contains enzymes for TCA cycle, beta-oxidation of fatty acids and the first stage of the urea cycle.
        - Rough endoplasmic reticulum is the site of many protein syntehsis, for example, Albumin (which accounts for a significant part of blood proteins), Coagulation factors, Enzymes such as G6Pase, also for the synthesis of triglycerides?
        - Smooth endoplasmic reticulum contains microsomes for bilirubin conjugation (UDP-dependent glucoronosyltransferase (UGT)), Detoxyfication by cytochrome p450 enzymes, steroid synthesis, cholesterol synthesis, bile acid synthesis
        - Peroxisomes also produce
        - Lysosomes - for iron decomposition, lipofuscin, bile pigments, copper
        - Golgi apparatus lies proximate to cannaliculi, involved in secretions such as bile acids and albumin
    - Liver functions can be classified into different types:
        - Liver can serve synthetic functions in the synthesis of plasma proteins and coagulation proteins - Mainly albumin for plasma proteins, and a long list of other proteins
        - Liver also serves metabolic functions - Carbohydrate mtabolism, lipid and lipoprotein metabolism, amino acid metabolism
        - Storage functions - Vit ADEK, Fe in ferritin, Cu
        - Endocrine functions - steroid production and activation of vitamin D
        - Excretory functions - Production of hepatic bile and the elimination of bilirubin.
- Liver function test (LFT)
    - Routine liver function test generally consist of the following components:
        - Albumin - A test of liver synthetic functions
        - Globulin (not as important)
        - Total bilirubin, conjugated bilirubin and unconjugated bilirubin - An assessment of the types of jaundice? Follow the bilirubin in bilirubin metabolism
        - 
- [[Bilirubin metabolism]]
    - In all structures supplied with sinusoidal capillaries (liver, spleen and bone marrow), damaged or old RBC (the life span of the RBC lasts around 120 days) is essentially phagocytosed by the macrophages (Kupffer cells, splenic macrophages), though a process called erythrocyte clearance.
    - The main component of RBC, haemoglobin is initially broken down into heme and globin.
    - Heme is broken down into bilivirdin by heme oxidase, and further into bilirubin by bilivirdin reductase. Bilirubin can be released into circulation, as unconjugated/indirect bilirubin (which is insoluble), and complexes with albumin (albumin synthesized by the liver) and carried via the splenic vein, which drains into the hepatic portal vein into hepatocytes. Recall the [[Venous drainage of the abdominal viscera]], particularly the spleen.
    - In hepatic sinsuoids and the space of Disse, the basolateral (sinusoidal) membrane of hepatocytes take up the unconjugated bilirubin via *bilirubin transporters.*
    - Unconjugated bilirubin is shuttled into the smooth endoplasmic protein, where it conjugates with glucuronic acid, mediated by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT), a phase 2 enzyme in [[Mediated by UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs)]]. Conjugated bilirubin is formed, and excreted into the bile canaliculi via apical (canalicular) membrane MRP-2 (multidrug-resistant associated peptide Type 2), and becomes part of the hepatic bile.
    - Eventually, conjugated bilirubin is released into the gut. It first becomes unconjugated by the gut microbiota. Unconjugated bilirubin is then processed by the gut microbiota:
        - It becomes urobillinogen, where most is converted into stercobillinogen, and into stercobillin. *Stercobillin gives faeces its brown colour*.
        - A small amount of urobillinogen is reabsorbed into circulation, and excreted by renal mecanisms.