- Chemical neurotransmission
	- Chemical neurotransmission refers to the process by which an impulse is transmitted from one neuron to another, or to an effector, across a chemical synapse.
	- [[Process of chemical neurotransmission across a chemical synapse]]
		- With reference to notes from:
			- [[IAS14 Enzymes]]
			- [[IAS32 Membrane Excitability]]
			- [[IAS34 Transmission of Nerve Signals]]
			- [[IAS38 Neural Architecture]]
	- Quantal transmission over a chemical synapse
		- Discovery of quantal transmission earned Bernard Katz a nobel prize in 1970.
		- Quantal transmission across a chemical synapse believes that there is a unit for neurotransmission across a synapse.
		- This unit of neurotransmission termed "quanta", is mediated by the release of specific amounts of neurotransmitters
		- This is supported when Katz found that even without stimulation, there are mini end plate potentials (mepp) of fixed size 0.5mv that is precipitated by presence of 5000 ACh molecules
		- He also discovered that Ca2+ is required for the release of the quanta units of ACh
		- Overall EPP is always integral multiples of the mepp (0.5mv), suggesting that EPP are agregates of mepp
	- [[Molecular machinery that mediates docking of synaptic vesicles to presynaptic membrane and membrane fushion]]
		- Synaptobrevin in the synaptic vesicles, syntaxin in the presynaptic membrane and SNAP-25 coil around each other, docking the vesicles to the presynaptic membranes.
		- But synaptotagmin normally prevents close contact, blocks fushion of the vesicular membrane and presynaptic membrane
		- But with the arrival Ca2+ from Ca2+ influx through L-type Ca2+ channels, Ca2+ bound synaptotagmin catalyses membrane fushion, enabling the releaes of neurotransmitters
	- Neurotransmitters
		- Neurotransmitters mediate chemical transmission
		- There are 2 groups of neurotransmitters
			- Small molecules
			- Neuropeptides
			- They differ in their synthesis, and the duration of action
				- In terms of synthesis:
					- Enzymes are synthesised in cell bodies, and are slowly transported to the presynaptic terminal. Small molecules are synthesised at the presynaptic terminal. Eventually degraded, and reuptake for resynthesis.
					- Neuropeptide precursors and enzymes are synthesised in cell bodies, and via axonal transport reaches the presynaptic terminal. Where they are converted to active forms of neuropeptides
				- In terms of duration of action:
					- Smal molecules usually rapidly acting
					- Neuropeptides usually long duration of action.
		- Acetylcholine and nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
			- Acetylcholine
				- Synthesised by 
		- Glutamate and ionotropic glutamate receptors
			- Glutamate binds to two receptors
				- AMPA - opens to allows rapid influx of Na+
				- NMDA - normally blocked by Mg2+, depolarization caused by opening of AMPA receptors results in displaced Mg2+, which allows entry of Na+ that further depolarizes membrane, and Ca2+ influx to serve as a secondary mesenger.
		- Glutamate and metabotropic glutamate receptors
			- mGluR - G-protein coupled receptors
		- GABA and GABA receptors