# 15 Oct 2022

Created at: October 15, 2022 11:29 AM

- Muscles of the upper limb
    - Muscles that move the pectoral girdle
        - These muscles usually originate from the axial skeleton and inserts onto the scapulae and/or the clavicle
        - The trapezius and the deltoid forms much of the superficial layer of muscle of the shoulder.
        - Trapezius - origin (head, neck and thoracic vertebrae), Trapezius inserts in a U shaped structure: Upper fibres insert onto the posterior surface of the lateral 1/3 of the clavicle, middle fibres insert at the acromion and the lower fibres insert at the spine of the scapulae. The upper fibres elevates the pectorial girdle, the middle fibres retracts and adducts scapulae. and the lower fibres depresses scapulae.
        - Deep to the trapezius the scapula is attached to the vertebral column by three muscles—the levator scapulae, rhomboid minor, and rhomboid major. These three muscles work with the trapezius (and with muscles found anteriorly) to position the scapula on the trunk.
        - Levator scapulae - Originates from CV1-CV4 transverse process and inserts along the medial border of the scapula, from superior angle to above the base of the scapulae spine (root of scapulae spine) Levator scapulae elevates the scapulae with the upper fibres of the trapezium
        - Rhomboid minor - Originates at CV7 and TV1 spinous process, and inserts at medial border of scapula, at base of scapular spine
        - Rhomboid major - Originates at TV2 to TV5 spinous process and inserts at the medial border of the scapulae from below the base of scapular spine to the inferior angle Rhomboids retract the scapulae with the middle fibres.
        - Serratus anterior muscles also is involved in moving the pectorial girdle.
            - Serratus anterior is a teeth-shaped muscle that forms the medial wall of the axilla, that originates from the lateral surfaces of ribs 1 to 9, and extends posteriorly around the thoracic wall and inserts at the medial borders of the scapulae at the costal (anterior?) surface.
            - The serratus anterior is involved in the protraction and the upward rotation of the scapulae. This movement of the scapulae is achieved by coordination between the upper fibres of the trapezius and the lower fibres of the serratus anterior. The upper fibres of the trapezius elevates the acromion and hence elevates the scapulae. The lower fibres of the trapezius elevates the inferior angle, or pulls it laterally. This enables the upward rotation of the scapulae. Upward rotation of scapulae is required in full abduction of the arm (first we need to raise our arm above the head). Refer to, or create a new note refering to “Full abduction of the arm requires coordination between abduction of the glenohumeral joint and the upward rotation of the scapulae.
            - Another important function of the serratus anterior is that it holds the scapulae close to the body, or to the thoracic cage. Any paralysis of the serratus anterior due to damage of long thoracic nerve can cause winging of the scapulae.
        - Pectoralis minor - Pectoralis minor originates from the 3-5th rib and inserts onto the corocoid process. It depresses the scapulae.
        - Subclavius
            - Originates from 1st costal cartilage and inserts on the inferior surface of clavicle, at the groove for subclavius. It depresses the clavicle.
    - Concept: Axilla is a gateway to the upper limb, a transition zone between the neck and the arm. Read Gray’s “Axilla”
    - Muscles that move the arm are essentially muscles that move the glenohumeral joint
        - These muscles tend to originate from the axial skeleton or pectorial girdle, and inserts at the humerus
        - Deltoid forms the most superficial part of the shoulder:
            - *********************Origin of the deltoid mimicks the insertion of the trapezius*********************. Anterior fibres origin from the anterior surface of the lateral third of the clavicle, middle fibres origin from the acromion, posterior surface originates from the spine of the scapula. They all insert at the deltoid tuberosity, halfway down the humerus.
            - Anterior fibres provide flexion, middle fibres provide abduction of the shoulder joint, posterior fibres provide extension.
        - Latissimus dorsi originates from TV7 to 12 spinous process and the thorocolumbar fascia, and inserts at the floor of the intertubercular groove on the anterior surface of the humerus. It twists along its course.
            - It serves for adduction, extension and medial rotation.
        - Pectoralis major originates from the medial 2/3 of the clavicle, the sternum and the first 6 costal cartilages and inserts onto the lateral lip of the intertubercular groove.
            - It serves adduction, flexion and medial rotation
        - Teres major originates from the lower 1/3 of lateral border of scapulae and iserts onto the medial lip of intertubercular groove.
            - It enables adduction, medial rotation and extension.
        - Coracobrachialsi originates from corocoid process of scapulae and inserts onto the middle of medial side of humeral shaft (opposite to the insertion of deltoid muscle), it mainly provides flexion.