# 16 Oct 2022

Created at: October 16, 2022 11:24 AM

- Muscles of the forearm
    - The forearm is classified into the anterior compartment of the forearm, and posterior compartment of the forearm. The two compartments are separated by the interosseous membrane and fascia of the muscles. Note that the posterior group seeps into the anterior group on the lateral side, due to the brachioradialis.
    - The muscles of the anterior compartment of the forearm largely are associated with the movement of the wrist joint (those with the word ******carpi****** in their name), pronation, and flexion of the fingers.
    - All muscles of the anterior compartment is innervated by the median nerve, except for the flexor carpi ulnaris and the medial half of the flexor digitorum profundus
    - Superficial layer: proceeding from medial to lateral
        - Superficial carpi ulnaris. The most medial muscle of the anterior compartment of the forearm. It originates from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the olecranon and posterior border of the ulna. It inserts onto the pisiform, the hook of halmate and the 5th metacarpal joint
            - It enables wrist flexion and adduction.
        - Palmaris longus. A vestigal muscle (absent in some individual). Lateral to the superficial carpi longaris, it originates from the medial epicondyle of the humerus, and produces a long tendon that inserts at the flexor reticulum and the palmar aponeurosis.
            - It enables flexion of the wrist.
        - Superficial carpi radialis
            - It originates from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and inserts onto the base of the 2nd and 3rd metacarpal.
            - It enables wrist flexion and abduction (radial devision).
        - Pronator teres
            - It originates from the medial epicondyle of the humerus, and also consist of the ulnar head (The median nerve leaves the cubital fossa and passes through the two heads). It inserts to the lateral side of the midshaft of the radius.
    - Intermediate layer: Flexor digitorum superficialis
        - The flexor digitorum superficialis has 2 heads
            - The humero-ulnar head, which originates from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the medial edge of the coranoid process of the ulna.
            - The radius head, which originates from the anterior oblique line of the shaft of the radius.
            - The two heads fuse to give a muscle belly, which gives of the 4 tendons at the distal forearm, one for each digit except for the thumb.
            - The 4 tendons pass through the carpal tunnel, tendons for middle and ring finger lies anterior of the index finger and ring finger.
            - At the middle phalanges, the tendons split to give two slips that passes posteriorly of the tendons of the flexor digitorum profundus and inserts at the sides of the middle phalanges.
            - It flexes the PIP joints of digits II-V
    - Deep layer
        - Flexor digitorum profundus flexes the distal interphalangeal joints of digits 2-5.
            - It originates from the ulnar and at the distal forearm, gives off 4 tendons for the 4 medial fingers (Digs 2-5).
            - The tendons courses through the carpal tunnel, and lie deep to the tendons of the flexor digitorum superficialis. The tendons are arranged in the same plane. They insert at the distal phalanges of digit 2-5.
            - It flexes the DIP joints of digits 2-5.
        - Flexor pollicis longus
            - A muscle that originates from the anterior surface of the radius, and at the distal forearm, gives off a tendon that courses through the carpal tunnel, lateral to the tendons of the FDS and FDP. The tendon inserts at the base of the distal phalanges.
            - It flexes the IPjoint of the thumb
        - Pronator quadratus (The deepest muscle of the anterior group)
            - Originates from the distal quarter of the ulnar and inserts at the distal quarted of the radius.
            - It enables pronation
- Posterior compartment of the forearm
    - Superficial layer from lateral to medial
        - Brachioradialis
            - Originates from the lateral supracondylar ridge of the humerus, and inserts onto the base of the radial styloid process.
            - As it lies anterior to the elbow joint, it facilitates the flexion of the elbow joint, most efficient when in mid-prone position.
        - Extensor carpi radialis longus
            - Originates from the lateral supracondylar ridge and the lateral epicondyle of humerus and inserts onto the dorsal side of the base of the 2nd metacarpal
            - It extends and abducts the wrist joint.
        - Extensor carpi radialis brevis
            - Originates from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and inserts onto the dorsal surface of the base of 3rd metacarpal. It enables the extension and abduction of wrist joint.
        - Extensory digitorum
            - Originates from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and gives off 4 tendons distally that insert into the extensor expansion. It branches to give the central band that inserts at the base of the middle phalanx, and 2 lateral bands that insert at the base of distal phalanx.
            - This enables it to be the main extensor of the 4 medial fingers.
        - Extensor digiti minimi
            - Originates from lateral epicondyle of the humerus and inserts into the extensor expansion of digit V.
            - It is the extensor of digit 5.
        - Extensor carpi ulnaris
            - Originates from LE of H, and inserts into the tubercle at the base of 5th metacarpal.
                - It functions to extend and adduct the wrist.