# 17 Oct 2022

Created at: October 17, 2022 11:35 AM

- Intrinsic muscles of the hand
    - Intrinsic muscles of the hands are the muscles that origiate and insert within the hands. Contrasting this with extrinsic muscles of the hand, which tends to originate from the forearm.
    - Intrinsic muscles of the hand can be largely classified into 5 groups:
        - Thenar muscles
        - Adductor pollicus
        - Hypothenar muscles
        - Lumbricals (palmar surface)
        - Interossei muscles
    - 
        - Thenar muscles are muscles that move the thumb.
- Brachial plexus - A bundule of nerves that take its origin from the ventral rami of C5-C8, and T1
    - Roots → Trunk (superior, middle, inferior)→ Divisions (anterior and posterior) → Cords (Converge from different divisions, posterior, lateral and medial relative to the position of the axillary artery) → Nerve branches
    - The roots are the ventral rami from C5-T1. They are within the prevertebral musculature (between the middle and anterior scalene muscles)
    - Trunks - Roots converge to give trunks. They are located at the posterior triangle of the neck, bordered at the base by the clavicle, anteriorly bordered by the sternal head of SCM and posteriorly bordered by the trapezius
        - Superior trunk  - Convergence between C5 to C6 roots
        - Middle trunk - Continuation of the root of C7
        - Inferior trunk - Convergence between roots of C8 and T1
    - The trunks divide into the anterior and posterior divisions (for all 3 trunks). These division sit behind the clavicle. Note that the anterior divisions supply the anterior flexor compartments of the arm (and forearm?) while the posterior divisions supply supply the the posterior extensor compartment. ****************************************************This is pretty self explanatory, as the posterior divisions all converge into the posterior cord, and descend relatively posteriorly in the upper limb.****************************************************
    - The 6 divisions from the 3 trunks converge into 3 cords at the upper half of the axilla.
        - The anterior divisions of the superior and middle trunk converge to give the lateral cord.
        - The anterior division of the lower trunk continues as the medial cord.
        - The posterior divisions of all 3 trunks converge to give the posterior cord. As it originates from the posterior divisions, it naturally sits **********posterior********** to the 2nd part of the axillary artery.
    - Terminal branches of the brachial plexus, or the branches of the cords
- Nerve branches of the root
    - Dorsal scapular nerve - an immediate bran
    - Long thoracic nerve (Branch of C5, C6, C7) converge to give the long thoracic nerve
- [[Regional anatomy of the limb misses the point, learning anatomy of the limbs by structure reveals its clinical significance]]
- Full abduction of the arm at the glenohumeral joint requires a coordination between the supraspinatus, deltoid, serratus anterior and trapezius
    
    [[Full abduction of the arm requires action of 4 muscles]] 
    
- At anatomical position, the tip of the elbow lies posteriorly, and the knee lies anteriorly.
- The coracoid process is a prominent process of the scapulae for the attachement of many ligaments and muscles
    - Ligaments - Corococlavicular ligaments, coracoacromial ligament
    - Muscles - Pectoralis minor, short head of biceps brachii, Coracobrachialis
- Supinators - Supinator, Biceps brachii
- Abductor pollicus longus acts on the CMC joint of the thumb, brevis acts on the metacarpophalangeal joint of the thumb