# 20 Oct 2022

Created at: October 20, 2022 5:38 PM

- [[Carpal tunnel]]
    - The carpal tunnel is an anatomical space located anteriorly in the wrist, enclosed by the base of the carpal arch (radially, the tubercles of the scaphoid and trapezium, pisiform and hook of halmate on the medial side), and the flexor retinaculum
    - The flexor retinaculum refers to the thick connective tissue ligament that connects to the edges of the base of the carpal arch and converts the carpal arch into a carpal tunnel.
    - Carpal tunnel encloses many structures: The tendons of flexor digitorum profundus, tendons of flexor digitorum superficialis, and tendons of flexor pollicus longus. The medial nerve lies anterior of these tendons and is largely associated with carpal tunnel syndrome.
    - The flexor retinaculum holds the tendons to the bony plane at the wrist and prevents them from “bowing.”
    - However, the carpal tunnel does not enclose all structures in the wrist. The radial artery, ulnar artery lie lateral and medial of the carpal tunnel, as well as the extensor tendons
- [[Dorsal extensor expansion of the digits]]
- [[Anatomical snuffbox]]
    - Historically, ground tobacco (snuff) is placed in the depression before being inhaled through the nose, and hence its name, anatomical snuff box.
    - It is a depression on the lateral side of the of the dorsum of the hand (near the base of the hand. Its lateral border is formed by the tendons of the adductor pollicus longus and the extensor pollicus brevis, while its medial border is formed by the extensor pollicus policus.
    - The scaphoid and trapezium forms the base of the anatomical snuffbox.
    - The radial artery crosses underneath the tendons of the adductor pollicus longus and extensor extensor pollicus brevis, and reappears in the anatomical snuff box.
    - Terminal parts of the superficial branch of the radial nerve pass subcutaneously over the snuffbox as does the origin of the cephalic vein from the dorsal venous arch of the hand.
- [[Palmar aponeurosis]]
    -