# 21 Oct 2022

Created at: October 21, 2022 9:45 AM

- Arterial supply of the upper limb
    - Arterial supply of the upper limb starts from the axillary artery, which continues as the brachial artery, which then branches into the radial and ulnar artery, where in the hand, they form deep and superficial palmar arches, which dive rises to digital arteries
- [[Axillary artery]]
    - The axillary artery is the continuation of the subclavian artery which begins at the lateral border of the 1st rib (once it enters the axillary inlet) and ends at the lower border of the teres major muscle
    - The axillary artery supplies the shoulder, the scapular region and the pectoral region.
    - The axillary artery is separated by 3 parts: the 1st part, 2nd part and the 3rd part
        - The 1st part gives rise to the superior thoracic artery, which runs through the 1st and 2nd intercostal space and supplies the associated structures.
        - The 2nd part gives rise to:
            - Thoracoacromial artery - a short stump that arises from the anterior surface of the second part of the axillary artery (posterior to the medial margins of the pectoralis minor), gives of 4 branches: pectorial, deltoid, clavicular and acromial branches, associated with blood supply to the shoulder region.
            - Lateral thoracic artery - a long artery that descends along the medial axillary wall, arising from the anterior surface of the second part of the axillary artery (posterior to the lateral margins of the pectoralis minor)
        - The 3rd part gives rise to:
            - Anterior circumflex humeral artery - Crosses the surgical neck of the humerus anteriorly and anastamose with the posterior circumflex humeral artery
            - Posterior circumflex humeral artery - Crosses the surgical neck of the humerus posteriorly (via the quadrangular space)
            - Subscapular artery - Circumflex scapular artery and thoracodorsal artery
                - Circumflex access posterior scapular region via triangular space
- [[Brachial artery]]
    - The brachial artery is the continuation of the axillary artery once it leaves the axilla, i.e. once it crosses the inferior border of the teres major. It descends along the groove between the biceps brachii muscle and the brachialis muscle, and largely lies over the coracobrachialis. It is associated with the median nerve. The median nerve crosses the brachial artery anteriorly from the lateral to medial side.
    - The brachial artery descends to the cubital fossa, and is overlied by the bicipital aponeurosis
    - In the cubital fossa, it crosses the tendon of biceps brachii medially to laterally, when it leaves the cubital fossa, it gives rise to the radial and ulnar arteries
    - The brachial artery gives rise to an immediate branch, the deep brachial artery in the axilla, which access the posterior scapular region via the triquetral interval, and courses along the radial groove with the radial nerve. It supplies the posterior compartment of the arm.
- [[Cubital fossa]]
    - The cubital fossa is an important anatomical landmark that lies anterior to the elbow (olecranon of the ulna). Its triangular shaped, where the lateral margins is marked by the brachioradialis, its medial margins is marked by the pronator teres, and its base is marked by an imaginary line across the medial and lateral epicondyle of the humerus
    - The floor consist of the brachialis muscle, supinator muscle, the roof, bicipital aponeurosis, skin and fascia
    - Important structures passing through, the radial nerve, median nerve and the brachial artery.
- [[Radial artery]]
    - Radial artery is a brach of the brachial artery and courses beneath the brachioradialis, similar to the superficial branch of the radial nerve. It lies lateral to the tendons of the flexor carpi radialis (radial pulse). In the wrist, it crosses the tendons of the abductor pollicus longus and extensor pollicus brevis and reappears on the anatomical snuffbox.
- [[Ulnar artery]]
    - A branch of the brachial artery that courses relatively medially, deep to the intermediate layer of the muscles. Gives rise to a common interosseous artery which immediately branches to the anterior and posterior interosseous artery.
- [[Superficial veins of the upper limb]]
    - Blood from dorsal venous arch drains into basilic and cephalic veins
    - Cephalic vein lies on the radial side, basilic vein on the medial side
    - Cephalic vein begins at the anatomical snuff box, where it turns to the anterior side, courses upwards into the deltoectoral groove, and triangle, it eventually drains into a the axillary vein, but along its course, also produce penetrating veins that drain into the deep veins.
    - Basilic vein also turns to the anterior side, and continues to course medially The basilic vein joins the brachial vein to form the axillary vein
- Some thoughts on anatomy practical 3
    - Muscles are smaller than what complete anatomy shows
    - The medial nerve and radial artery lie anteriorly to the coracobrachialis and medial to biceps brachii
    - The ulnar nerve in the arm can be found in the medial intermuscular septum? need to confirm. But it does pass anterior to posterior