# 22 Oct 2022

Created at: October 22, 2022 10:24 AM

- [[Superficial veins of the upper limb]]
    - 2 superficial veins drain the subcutaneous tissue of the upper limb, the cephalic vein and the basilic veins
    - The cephalic vein arises from the anatomic snuffbox, at the radial side, then courses to the anterior side of the the forearm and arm. The cephalic vein drains into penetrating veins that drain into the deep veins (named along with the corresponding arteries). Eventually, the cephalic vein courses along the deltopectoral groove and triangle, and drains into the axillary vein.
    - The basilic vein originates from the ulnar side of the hand, and courses to the anterior side of the forearm and arm. The basilic vein continues at the medial side of the arm, and combines with the brachial vein to form the axillary vein.
    - At the cubital fossa, the cephalic vein and basilic vein communicate via a median cubital vein.
- [[Anatomy of the small intestine]]
    - The small intestine is the segment of the GI tract that extends from the pyloric opening to the ileocecal junction. It is separated into the Duodenum, the ileum and the jejunum.
    - Duodenum
        - Main site for chemical digistion
        - Retroperitoneal except for the begining of the 1st part, where it is suspended on the hepatoduodenal ligament of the lesser omentum.
        - Posterior to the 1st part, is the gastroduodenal artery
        - The duodenum is a short C-shaped segment of the small intestine (25cm), but is the widest. It wraps around the pancreatic head.
        - The duodenum is separated into the 4 parts: 1st part (superior, or duodenal cap), 2nd (descending), 3rd part (inferior) and 4th part, ascending
        - There are circular folds on the duodenum (except for the 1st part), and the rest of the small intestine, which increase surface area for absorption, these are the pilcae circulares.
        - At the postero-medial wall of the 2nd part of the duodenum, the CBD and MPD drains into the major duodenal papilla
        - The accessory pancreatic duct opens to the dudenum proximally, at the lesser duodenal papilla
    - Ileum and jejunum
        - loops of small bowel suspended on messentery that runs obliquely, from the RUQ to the LLQ.
        - Together 6-7m, with no clear demarcations.
        - Supplid by Superior mesenteric artery via jejunal and ileal arteries, where they branch to form arcades and vasa recta. Vaso recta eventually penatrates the [[The common histological layers of the GI tract]]. Arcades provide collateral blood supply. Jejunum has 1 layer of arcades and long vasa recta, while ileum has multiple layers of arcades and a short vasa recta
        - As it is a midgut derivative, it is innervated by the lesser splanchnic nerve and the vagus
    - Ileocecal valve
- Anatomy of the large intestine
    - Large intestine is the segment of GI tract that is distal to the ileo-cecal valve
    - It consist of the cecum and appendix, right, transverse, left, sigmoid colon, rectum and anal canal
    - The large intestine is characterised by teniae coli, 3 longitudinal bands of smooth muscles, which is aggregates of the outer longitudinal layer of the muscularis externae ([[Histology of the large intestine]]). The teniae coli separate the colon into haustra, which are pouch like structures.
    - On the teniae coli, omental appendices are present, which are  fatty appendices (projections of the colon)
    - Cecum (and appendix)
        - The cecum is the proximal part of the the large intestine, and is inferior to the terminal ileum, and on the right iliac fossa. It is largely an intraperitoneal structure, and quite mobile, as it is not suspended by mesenteries
        - The appendix is an intestinal diverticuli (outpouching), and is suspended from the terminal ileum by the mesoappendix.
        - The appendix is almost always continuous with the anterior teniae coli, but distally, its position varies:
            - It may be anterior or posterior to the ileum (preileal and postilieal)
            - It may be inferior to the cecum (subcecal)
            - It may be posterior to the cecum (retrocecal)
            - It may descend into the pelvic cavity (pelvic)
        - The appendix is rich in lymphoid tissue.
        - The appendix is supplied by appendicular artery (branch of the SMA)
    - Colon:
        - Ascending (right) - Superior to cecum, secondarily retroperitoneal, extending from the level of the ileocecal valve to the right colic fexure (hepatic flexure)
        - Transverse - Between the right and left colic flexure, intraperitoneal and is largely is suspended in the peritoneal cavity by the transverse mesocolon.
        - Descending - Secondarily retroperitoneal, extending from left colic flexure (splenic flexure) and the left iliac fossa.
        - Sigmoid - Intraperitoneal, suspended by the sigmoid mesocolon, from the left iliac fossa or the left pelvic inlet to the rectosigmoid junction, where the teniae, haustra and omental appendices, the structures that define the large intestine ceases. This transition occurs anterior to the third sacral segment (S3).