# 29 Oct 2022

Created at: October 29, 2022 9:08 PM

- MSS PBL Case 1 LO: Physical examination for joint pathologies
    - You would rarely perform full physical examination of both upper limbs and lower limbs (kind of useless)
    - Clinical history and symptomatology is the most important aspect in building a differential diagnosis and ruling out certain diseases.
        - When taking a history, start with chief compaint: Usually would be joint pain.
        - Rule out musculoskeletal emergencies - especially infection or sepsis.
            - A history of high-grade fever, weight loss, malaise points towards Septic arthritis
            - On PE, a hot and swollen joint could be indicative of infection or septic arthritis, but can also indicate inflammatory joint disorders, e.g. RA.
        - History of complaint (Joint pain in this case)
            - Number of joints involved, symmetry, which joint affected → can narrow down ddx
            - Time of onset, and duration?
                - OA usually aggrevated by motion and weightbearing activities
                - RA usually aggrevated by immobility, **********************************morning stiffness**********************************
            - Acute or chronic
            - Temporal involvement of joint pain
            - Previous trauma?
            - Any extra-articular features
        - Family history - RA etc.
    - Physical examination
        - Most important part of physical examination is to establish whether there is effusion or synovitis. Presence of these tend to be indicative of infective or rheumatic diseases
            - Cardinal signs - redness, warmth over joint, soft tissue swelling, (pain)
        - Testing ROM is also important:
            - Palpation - Crepitus
    - [https://www-uptodate-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/contents/monoarthritis-in-adults-etiology-and-evaluation?search=physical examination of arthritis&source=search_result&selectedTitle=4~150&usage_type=default&display_rank=4](https://www-uptodate-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/contents/monoarthritis-in-adults-etiology-and-evaluation?search=physical%20examination%20of%20arthritis&source=search_result&selectedTitle=4~150&usage_type=default&display_rank=4)