# 3 Oct 2022

Created at: October 3, 2022 2:06 PM

- The pectorial girdle is part of the bony framework of the shoulder.
    - The pectorial girdle functions to anchor the shoulder to the axial skeleton, particularly to the sternum via the sternoclavicular joint (The clavicle is the only **bony** attatchment between the upper limb to the trunk, there may likely be fibrous attachment)
    - The [[Pectoral girdle]]  is made of the clavicle and the the scapulae (connected by the acromioclavicular joint).
        - Movement of the pectorial girdle
            - The clavicule and scapulae move as a unit:
                - Elevation and depression
                - Protraction and retraction - Protraction of scapulae causes the scapulae to move away from each other, while retraction causes them to move towards each other. (thick of a pushup: when elbow joint extended, scapulae should also be protracted, when flexed, scapulae is retracted).
                - Rotation of scapulae, upward rotation (glenoid fossa faces up), downward rotation, glenoid fossa faces down
    - [[Clavicle]]
        - Clavicle is a long bone, S-shaped bone - S shaped in a sense that the medial 2/3 is convex anteriorly, and lateral 1/3 is concave anteriorly.
        - The superior surface is smooth. The inferior surface is relatively rough, with certain elevations and groove. At the sternal end, there is the costal tubercle (site of attachment for costoclavicular ligament) In the middle, there is the groove for subclavius, and at the acromial end, there is the conoid tubercle and trapezoid line, for the attachment of coracoclavicular ligament.
        - The sternal end of the clavicle articulates to the sternum, the acromial end of the clavicle articulates to the Acromion of the scapulae.
    - [[Scapulae]]
        - A large triangular flat bone overlying the ribs, with:
            - 3 angles - superior angle, inferior angle, and lateral angle that forms the glenoid fossa, pear-shaped depression the socket for the shoulder joint (glenohumeral joint)
            - 3 borders - Superior, medial and lateral
            - 2 processes - Spine that expands into acromion (tip of the shoulder)
            - 2 surfaces - The posterior surface (divided into the supraspinous and infraspinous fossa) and the anterior surface (i.e. subscapular fossa) concave to accomodate the shape of the thoracic cage
        - The lateral end of superior border forms the coracoid process ( a hook like structure), medial to it, is a scapular/suprascapular notch
    - Joints (From grays)
        - The three joints in the shoulder complex are the sternoclavicular, acromioclavicular, and glenohumeral joints.
        - The sternoclavicular joint and the acromioclavicular joint link the two bones of the pectoral girdle to each other and to the trunk. The combined movements at these two joints enable the scapula to be positioned over a wide range on the thoracic wall, substantially increasing “reach” by the upper limb.
        - The glenohumeral joint (shoulder joint) is the articulation between the humerus of the arm and the scapula.
    - [[Sternoclavicular joint]] is the only joint that attaches the pectoral girdle to the axial skeleton
        - Classified as a synovial saddle joint, or a double plane joint
        - Within the joint capsule, a fibrocartilage, known as the articular disc separates the joint cavity into two compartments. The proximal articular disc attachment is the sternal end of clavicle. The inferior attachment is the superior part of the 1st costal cartilage.
        - Stabilization of the sternoclavicular joint
            - Intrinsic ligaments - Anterior sternoclavicular ligament, posterior sternoclavicular ligament (thickening of joint capsule)
            - Extrinsic ligaments - Interclavicular ligaments - between the two joint capsules These are gennerally weak.
            - Another extrinsic ligament - The costoclavicular ligament - Superior attachment at the costal tubercle at the inferior surface of the clavicle. Inferior attachment at the 1st costal cartilage.
            - But stabilization of the sternoclavicular joint is carried out by the articular disc.
        - Movement
            - Front and back (anterior-posterior plane)
            - Up and down (verticle plane)
            - Rotation - to some degree
    - [[Acromioclavicular joint]] is the joint between the acromion of the scapulae and the acromial end of the clavicle.
        - It is classified as a synovial plane joint
        - Articular disc is also present, but does not separate the joint cavity completely
        - Stabilization of the acromioclavicular joint
            - Acromioclavicular ligament (intrinsic ligament)
            - Corococlavicular ligament - Conoid ligament and trapezoid ligament superior attachment at the conoid tubercle and trapezoid line of the clavicle, with a inferior attachment at the conoid process.
- Free upper limb - It refers to the arm detatched from the pectoral girdle
- Arm (Brachium)
    - The humerus forms the bony framework of the arm
    - [[Humerus]]
        - The humerus is a typical long bone, with 2 expanded ends separated by a shaft
        - At its proximal end, the head of the humerus is a half spherical structure that projects medially and somewhat superiorly into the glenoid fossa of the scapulae.
        - Just distal to the head, is the anatomical neck is a very short constriction below the head, separating the head from the greater and lesser tubercles
        - The greater and lesser tubercle are located at the proximal expanded end of the humerus
            - Both lateral to the head, the greater tubercle is a more prominent landmark that occupies the lateral position, the lesser tubercle is a less prominent landmark, that occupies medially
            - Between the two tubercles, is the intertubercular (bicipital) groove, that courses inferiorly on the anterior surface of the shaft of the humerus. The long head of the bicep brachii courses along this groove.
            - The surgical neck is below the tubercle, i.e. below the expanded region
        - On the lateral surface of the shaft, halfway down the humerus, an elevation is present, the deltoid tuberosity. It serves as the insertion of the deltoid.
        - On the posterior surface of the shaft, the radial groove/spiral groove is present. It runs medially to laterally
        - Distal part of the humerus
            - Separated into the two condyles, the medial condyle and the lateral condyle
            - Capitulum serves as the articular facets of the lateral condyle (only visible anteriorly) and the trochlea serves as the articular facets of the medial condyle (visible both anteriorly and posteriorly)
            - The two epicondyles lies adjacent to and somewhat superior to the capitulum and the trochlea
            - The three fossas:
                - Radial fossa, superior to the capitulum on the anterior surface of the anterior surface of the humerus
                - Coranoid fossa, superior to trochlea on the anterior surface of the humerus
                - Olecranon fossa, on the posterior surface of the distal end of the humerus