# 4 Oct 2022

Created at: October 4, 2022 10:43 AM

- The two bones that define the forearm are the radius and the ulna
    - The radius occupies a lateral position whereas the ulna occupies the medial position
    - [[Radius]]
        - The radius is a long bone
        - Proximal end of the radius
            - Consist of a head, which is a disc like structure (cylindrical)
            - Distal to the head, is the neck, which is a disc like structure that separates the head and the radial (Bicipetal) tuberosity
            - The bicipital tuberosity is at the medial end of the neck, serves as the attachment of the bicep bronchii tendon.
        - Distal end of the radius
            - Consist of the dorsal tubercle on the posterior surface, which acts as a pulley for one of the extensor muscle of the thumb
            - The lateral end of the distal end of the radius forms the styloid process.
        - The shaft
    - [[Ulna]]
        - Proximal end of the ulna
            - Olecranon, trochlear notch, radial notch, coronoid process
                - Olecranon is the posterior bony projection that extends proximally from the ulna. It forms the ‘tip of the elbow’.
                - The coronoid process is the anterior bony projection from the ulna.
                - The trochlea is the articular surface for the articulation with the ulna.
                - The radial notch is a lateral surface that serves as the articular surface that articulates with the head of the radius.
                - All these structures cause the head of the ulna to assume a wrench-like shape.
    - [[Bones of the hand and the arches of the hand]]
        - Bones of the hand
            - The 8 carpals form the bones of the wrists
            - The 8 carpals are arranged in two rows, proceeding from medial to lateral in each row:
                - Scaphoid, Lunate, Triquetral, pisiform, trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, Hamate
                - Note the tubercle of the scaphoid, the tubercle of the trapezium, and the hook of hamate
                - The proximal transverse arch, or the carpal arch is accentuated by them and the pisoform
                - The distal transv
            - The 5 metacarpals form the bones of the metacarpus
            - The phalanges forms the bones of the digits - The thumb has two philages (proximal and distal) whereas the remaining digits has 3 phalages (proximal, middle and distal).
    - [[Shoulder joint (Glenohumeral [[joint)]]]]
        - The shoulder joint (glenohumeral joint) is a joint between the glenoid fossa of the [[Scapulae]] and the head of the [[Humerus]].
        - It is classified as a synovial ball and socket joint.
        - The surface area of the head of the humerus is march larger than the glenoid fossa, and the glenoid fossa is not a deep cavity, i.e. poor congruency between the two articulating structures. This results in poor stability, but good motility, a great range of motion. The margins of the glenoid fossa is lined by a fibrocartilage, the glenoid labrum, which deepens the glenoid fossa.
        - Movement of the shoulder joint
            - Extension and flexion
            - Abduction and adduction
            - Medial and lateral rotation
            - Circumduction
            - Note that full a abduction involves the upward rotation of the scapula
            - This is because abduction at shoulder stops when greater tubercle comes into contact with glenoid labrum.
        - Joint capsule is quite lose fitting
            - Proximal attachment is just outside the glenoid labrum, while distal attachment is at the anatomical neck, except inferiorly, where it is attached at the surgical neck.
            - The joint capsule is reinforce by the coracohumeral ligament (between the coracoid process and the humerus, the transverse humerus ligament (which spans between the greater and lesser tubercle), the glenohumeral ligaments (a thickened part of the joint capsule), and an extrinsic ligament,  coracoacromial ligament. It forms a secondary socket superiorly, preventing upward dislocation.
        - Stability of the shoulder joint
            - Offered by the coracoacromial ligament - restricts upward displacement of the humeral head
            - Offered mainly by the rotator cuff muscles (Supraspinatus, Subscapularis, Infraspinatus and the teres major. These muscles press the head of the humerus into the glenoid fossa.
        - Bursas of the shoulder joint
            - Subscapularis bursa (anterior of the joint) is continuous with the synovial cavity. It lubricates the subscapularis tendon.
            - Subdeltoid and subacromial bursa normally does not communicate with the synovial joint.
            - The intertubercular synovial sheath surrounds the long head of the biceps brachi. It is continuous with the synovial cavity.