# 5 Oct 2022

Created at: October 5, 2022 9:27 AM

- [[Elbow joint]]
    - Type: Synovial hinge joint
    - It is a joint which involves 3 articulations, which share the same synovial cavity.
    - Essentially consists of 2 joints, the The humeroradial joint, and the humeroulnar joint
    - The proximal radioulnar joint can be considered as part of the elbow joint
    - Moveements afforded by the elbow joint - Flexion and extension
    - Joint capsules of the elbow joint
        - The joint capsule (Articular capsule) is laxed anteriorly and posteriorly. The fibrous capsule is thickened medially and laterally to form the radial and ulnar collateral ligaments. This ligaments prevent abduction and adduction of the elbow joint.
        - The radial collateral ligament originates from the lateral epicondyle and attaches to the annular ligament of the radius, rather than the radius.
        - The ulnar collateral ligament originates from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and attaches to the proximal end of the humerus, it has 3 bands:
            - The anterior band, whic connects the medial epicondyle to the coronoid process, the posterior band, which connects the medial epicondyle to the olecranon, and the transverse band, which connects the two bands together.
        - Distally, the head of the radius is cuffed by the annular ligament of radius.
- [[Proximal and distal radioulnar joint]]
    - Proximal radioulnar joint can be part of the elbow joint
        - The head of the radius is inserted into the annular ligament and articulates with the radial notch of the ulna
        - Quadrate ligament (extrinsic ligament) reinforces the inferior aspect of the joint capsule.
        - Common dislocations - Pulled elbow in children, the radial head slips out of the annular ring
    - Distal radioulnar joint
        - The distal radioulnar joint is a joint between the head of the ulnar and the ulnar notch of the radius.
        - The articular disc at the distal end of the joint (fibrocartilage) binds the distal end of the radius and the ulna, the same articular disc prevents the participation of the ulna in the wrist joint
    - Classification (synovial pivot joints)
    - Movement - Supination and pronation
- [[Wrist joint (radiocarpal [[joint)]]]]
- [[Carpometalcarpal joint of the thumb]]