# 6 Nov 2022

Created at: November 6, 2022 9:53 AM

- [[Pseudogout]]
    - ATP released from cells is converted to pyrophosphate and AMP
    - Pyrophosphate is normally converted by alkaline phosphatase to inorganic phosphate.
    - Under the influence of growth promoting factors, it complexes with calcium to form Calcium pyrophosphate crysals
    - Associated with OA, as damaged cells will release ATP, also abnormal cartilage matrix may also interfere with growth factors
    - Crystals tend to trigger inflammation via the inflammasome pthway
    - Clinical features
        - May mimic gout, resulting in acute synovitis
        - May mimic OA, CPPD commonly affects radiocarpal, glenohumeral and midtarsal joint
        - Radiologically, chondrocalcinosis, or calcium deposition in the menisci
    - Pathology
        - Chalky white deposition in the joint synovium
    - HistoPathology
        - Purple granular deposits that is acellular, not surrounded by inflammatory cells or giant cells
- Muscle physiology
    - 
        - The neuromuscular junction is a peripheral chemical synapse between the motor neuron and the skeletal muscle fibres.
        - [[Neuromuscular junction is highly specialised in terms of its physiological anatomy]].
            - At the presynaptic terminal, the axonal terminal consist of clustering ACh filled synaptic vesicles at the active zone
            - At the postsynaptic terminal, AChR clustering at the crest of junctional folds
            - Precise alignment of synaptic vesicles in presynaptic terminal and AChR clusters in postsynaptic terminal is required for efficient synaptic transmission across a neuromuscular junction. This is achieved by the [[Induction of AChR clustering by innervation]]
        - [[Neurotransmission across a neuromuscular junction]]
            - AChR is synthesized from acetyl-CoA and choline via choline acetyltransferase [[Synthesis and degradation of acetylcholine]]
            - At the arrival of an action potential to the axomnal terminal (presynaptic terminal), it activates L-type Ca2+ channels (voltage gated ca2+ channels), which causes the exocytosis of ACh.
            - ACh diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds to AChR at the clefts of the junctional folds. This results in opening of ACh-gated cation channels that is resulted in an influx of Na+ and small efflux K+. This net depolarization effect is related to the negative resting potential (keeping K in the cell).
        - [[Innervation inducts AChR clustering at junctional folds]]
            - Induction of AChR clustering by motor neurons is achieved by the agrin-Lrp4-MuSK signalling pathway
            - Motor neurons secret ECM into the synaptic cleft, agrin is one of the components.
            - Agrin activates Lrp4 binding protein which activates Muscle Specific kinase at the junctional folds (within minutes).
            - MuSK activation leads to phosphorylation of AChR and hence induces its clustering at junctional folds.
            - This enables good alignment of synaptic vesicles and the AChR, which results in efficient neurotransmission
    - Muscle contraction
        - [[Sarcomere is the basic unit of a myofibril]]
            - Sarcomere is a defined by the 2 Z line, and M line is the middle of the sarcomere
            - Sarcomere is made of thick and thin filament
            - Thick filament - Myosin (300 myosin molecules made of 2 intertwisting myosin subunits), where myosin heads point towards thin filament (Tintin serves as the core of the thick filament stabilizing myosin, spanning from one Z disk to neighboring M line)
            - Thin filament - F-actin, nebulin, tropomyosin and troponin
                - Nebulin is a giant accessory molecule in the thin filament that attaches to the Z disk but does not extend to the M line. Holds the 2 F actin together
            - Tintin provides elasticity, enabling it to recoil to extend sarcomere length during muscle relaxation. It also stabilizes myosin.
            - Due to the arrangement of thick and thin filaments, there are different bands in a sarcomere
                - I band - thin filament only
                - A band - Region of thick filament, consist of both thick and thin filament, does not change in length during actin myosin interaction, consist of zone of overlap and H band
                    - H band, thick filament only
                    - Zone of overlap, consist of thick and thin filament
                    - During contraction, A band does not change in length, but the ratio between zone of overlap and H band changes
        - [[Sliding filament theory describes how muscle tension is produced at a Sarcomere level]]
            - This is related to the part of the contractile cycle, the power stroke, which is associated with the racket theory.
            - When cross bridges forms and power stroke occur, i.e. Muscle contraction, the zone of overlap between thick and thin filaments increase, while the I band decreases in length.
            - The 2 Z disc is pulled towards the M line, resulting in decrease in sarcomere length. This results in increased muscle tension, resulting in muscle contraction
        - [[[Maximal tension is created at optimal sarcomere length]]  [Initial sarcomere length determines muscle tension produced]]
            - Area of zone of overlap determines the number of cross-bridges that are formed, which determines the muscle tension produced.
            - Optimal resting sarcomere length creates maximal tension
                - At optimal resting sarcomere length, the thin filament do not extend over the M line
                - This large zone of overlap enables the greatest number of cross bridge formation, which results in maximal tension.
            - Increasing in sarcomere length results in decrease in muscle tension
                - This is because the area of the zone of overlap is reduced, resulting in reduced number of cross bridge formations, thus reducing tension.
            - Decreasing in sarcomere length in a way that the thin filaments overlap each other at rest interfers with the normal orientation of thick and thin filament, which reduces the number of cross bridge formation, and hence decreases tension production.
            - 
        - Different types of muscle contractions
            - Classified by the change in the length of the muscle during contraction
                - [[Isotonic and isometric muscle contractions]]
            - [[Different types of muscle fibres]]
        - [[Motor unit]]
            - Motor unit requires the aggregate of all muscle fibres innervated by a single motor neuron
            - Each muscle fibre innervated by the same motor unit are not bundled together, but spread evenly with the muscle. i.e Muscles fibres of different motor units are intermingled, such that the force aplied to the tendon remains roughly balanced regardless of which motor unit are stimulated
        - [[Muscle tension is dependent on motor unit recruitment]]
            - Summation refers to recruitment of adding individual twitch contractions to increase the force of overall muscle contraction. This can be carried out by:
                - Spatial recruitment (Mutlple fiber summation)  - Increasing the number of active motor unit
                - Temoral recruitment (frequency summation) - Increasing the frequency of activation of the same motor unit
        - [[Twitch, summation and tetanus]]
            - A twitch refers to muscle contraction in whic full relaxation of muscle is allowed to occur before the next stimulus. The time for developing a twitch depends on the type of muscle fibres
                - There is a latent period between stimulus and contraction, corresponds to the time required to conduct the action potential and subsequent release of calcium ions by the SR, i.e. time it takes for excitation contraction coupling.
            - (Frequency) Summation refers to the phenomenon in which stimulation arives before full relaxation occurs, such that the next contraction is partially added previous contraction, resulting in increase in muscle tension, or force summation.
            - Tetanus - Tension tapers off. Maximal tension is reached by frequency summation
            - Unfused tetanus - Stimuli is still far apart to allow muscle to relax slightly before stimuli
            - Fused tetani - When frequency reaches a certain level, the next stimuli arrives before the muscle relaxes, such that maximal tension is reached,
        
        [[Muscle physiology]]