# 8 Oct 2022

Created at: October 8, 2022 5:21 PM

- Lower limb bones and joints
    - The lower limb attaches to the axial skeleton by the sacroiliac joint by strong ligaments between the pelvic girdle and the sacrum? (refer to the ligaments of the pelvis, slide 8). Contrasting this with the upper limb, the upper limb is only attached to the axial skeleton by the sternoclavicular joint. (mobility vs stability?)
    - Learning the anatomy of the lower limb follows that of the upper limb, i.e. through regional anatomy. The lower limb is separated by the joints, compartment bones. *The lower limb is separated into 4 regions: The gluteal regions (butt), thign, leg (crus) and foot (pes)*.
        - Refer to Grays
        - The **gluteal region** is posterolateral and between the iliac crest and the fold of skin (gluteal fold) that defines the lower limit of the buttocks.
        - ▪
            
            Anteriorly, the **thigh** is between the inguinal ligament and the knee joint—the hip joint is just inferior to the middle third of the inguinal ligament, and the posterior thigh is between the gluteal fold and the knee.
            
        - ▪
            
            The **leg** is between the knee and ankle joint.
            
        - ▪
            
            The **foot** is distal to the ankle joint.
            
    - Note the popliteal fossa, the depression area between the thigh and leg, posterior to the knee (genu)
    - The bony framework that forms the glutteal region and thigh, is the pelvic girdle and the humerus. This joint between the two is the hip joint.
    - The bony framework of the thigh is the femur
    - The bony framework of the leg:
        - The tibia and the fibia, linked by an interosseus membrane
    - The bones of the foot include the tarsals, metatarsals and the phalanges.
    - [[Pelvic girdle]]
        - The pelvic girdle forms the bony framework of the gluteal region (left and right hip bones), part of the bony pelvis (pelvic girdle, sacrum and coccyx).
        - Each pelvic girdle consist of 3 bones, the superior ileum, the inferoanterior pubis and the inferoposterior pubis. These 3 bones fuse during puberty at the acetabulum.
        - The ileum is the superior fan-shaped bone of the pelvic girdle
            - The interior surface is associated with the abdomen, while the outer surface is associated with the gluteal region
            - It is bordered superiorly by the iliac crest, which extends anteriorly from the anterior superior iliac spine, and posteriorly at the posterior superior iliac spine
            - Laterally, just posterior to the ASIS, is the protrusion called the iliac tubercle.
            - The posterior superior iliac spine forms dimples of venus at the back, as it has short ligaments that attach to the skin of the back.
            - Note the anterior inferior iliac spine, inferior to the ASIS and superior to the acetabulum.
            - The large depressed surface of the ilium forms the iliac fossa, and is overlied by the psoas major
            - The medial end of iliac fossa, the arcuate line forms part of thepelvic inlet
        - The ischium is the inferoposterior bone of the pelvic girdle
            - It is the part of the pelvic girdle we are sitting on.
            - To note, the ischial tuberosity and the ischial spine (the ischial spine gives the greater sciatic notch and the lesser sciatic notch (converted into foramens by ligaments)
        - The pubis forms the anterior part of the pelvic girdle
            - Note the obturator crest, pubic tubercle and the pectineal line (forms part of the pelvic inlet)
        - The three bones of the pelvic girdle articulate at the acetabulum
            - The margins of the acetabulum is marked by the acetabular notch
            - The acetabular fossa is the shallow, central, circular depressed regions, which forms the non-articular surface of the acetabulum. *The acetabular fossa is continuous with the acetabular notch.*
            - The horseshoe-shaped/ Lunate area surrounding the fossa is lined with cartilage, and forms the articular surface.
            - The smooth crescent-shaped articular surface (the **lunate surface** ) is broadest superiorly where most of the body's weight is transmitted through the pelvis to the femur. The lunate surface is deficient inferiorly at the acetabular notch.
            - The acetabular fossa provides attachment for the ligament of the head of the femur, whereas blood vessels and nerves pass through the acetabular notch.
    - [[Sacroiliac joint]]
        - The sacroiliac joint is the articulation between the sacrum and the ileum. It serves as the articulation between the pelvic girdle to the axial skeleton.
        - Classified as a synovial plane joint, by definition it should be a movable joint. However, unlike the sternoclavicular joint (a synovial saddle joint), the sacroiliac joint is immovable, as it is connected to the sacrum via the interoseous sacroiliac joints.
        - Stabilization of the sacroiliac joint
            - Stabilised by ligaments of the pelvis
                - The anterior and posterior sacroliac ligaments
                - The iliolumbar ligaments (From the ilium to lumbar vertebrae)
                - The sacrotuberous ligament (From the ischial tuberosity to the sacrum and coccyx
                - The sacropspinous ligament
    - Anteriorly, the left and right pelvic girdles are held together by the pubic symphysis, a cartiliginous joint.