# 9 Nov 2022

Created at: November 9, 2022 8:31 AM

- Type of bones
    - Just by gross observation, bones can be generally classified into compact bones and cancellous bones. (Cortical bones vs spongy bones). Compact bones and spongy bones is a gross distinction, as the osteons of the compact bones and the trabeculae of spongy bone bears the same histological structure. ([[Compact bone and spongy bone differ by the presence of cavities]])
        - Compact bones are generally areas with no interconnecting cavities while cancellous bones consist of interconnecting cavities
        - Most bones consist of spongy bones in the core, surrounded by compact bones
        - In general, the epiphyses, i.e. the expanded ends are made of spongy bone surrounded by a layer of compact bone. In the diaphysis, i.e. the shaft, it is predominantly made of compact bones.
        - Compact bones
            - Grossly, no cavities is present
            - The anatomical and functional unit is an osteon (Harvesian system)
            - Concentric lamellae of bone matrix that surrounds the harvesian canal, which contains neurovascular structures and loose connective tissue
            - Harvesian canals supply nutrients to the osteocytes within the lamellae of bones via the cannaliculi.
            - Harvesian systems communicate with each other by transverse Volkmann’s canal, and is not surrounded by concentric lamellae of bones
            - Harvesian systems tend to overlap one another, resulting in a complex pattern due to the process of bone remodelling.
        - Cancellous bones
            - Grossly, interconnected cavities are present
            - Anatomical and functional unit is trabecula, consisting of anastamosing bony spicules, forming an interconnected space that is highly vascular and hosts the red bone marrow
            - Weaker, more flexible and a greater surface area
            - Good for metabolic activities,, e.g. maintaining Ca2+ homeostasis
            - Interconvertible with compact bones
    - On microscopic examination, bones can be classified into primary bones and secondary bones ([[Primary bone and secondary bone differ histologically]])
        - Primary bone (alias: immature bone, woven bone) - Bones that are found in embryological development or during ***********bone repair***********.
            - There is random disposition of collagen
            - Temporarily, in most adults, primary bones will be replaced by secondary bones
        - Secondary bones (alias: mature bones) - Most bones
            - Consist of organised lamellae of bony matrix, forming osteons
- [[Osteogenesis]]
    - Osteogenesis refers to the formation of bones during ************************embryological development************************
    - There are 2 ways of osteogenesis, both involve initial formation of primary bone, and the subsequent replacement of primary bone with secondary bone
        - [[Intramembranous ossification]] - which underlie the mechanism of formation of flat bones in the skull
            - Intramembranous ossification is involves direct differentiation of mesenchymal cells into osteoblast to secrete osteoid
            - Steps involved
                - Condensation of mesenchymal cells and the subsequent differentiation into osteoblasts that secret osteoids.
                - Osteoid undergoes calcification into bone matrix, entrapped osteoblasts become osteocytes to maintain the bone matrix
                - Surrounding mesenchymal tissue becomes periosteum and differentiates into osteoblast to lay down new osteoid.
                - Simutaneously, the calcified bone matrix, forms primary bone tissue, and is remodelled into secondary bone tissue, either grossly as compact or spongy bone.
        - [[Endochondral ossification]] - which underlie the mechanism of formation of most bones, as well as bone growth and bone repair.
            - Endochondral ossification is the process in which hyaline cartilage is erroded and replaced by osteoblasts producing osteoids.
            - Steps involved
                - In a preformed hyaline cartilage template, the cartilage becomes calcified, with chondrocyte loss
                - The surrounding perichondrial tissue becomes the periosteum, osteoclast comes in to degrade the cartilage matrix. SImutaneously, an osteogenic blood carrying osteoprogenitor cells and blood vessels) involve into the degraded cartilage.
                - Osteoprogenitor cells differentiate into osteoblasts and synthesize new matrix on top of calcified cartilage.
                - Remodelling from primary bones into secondary bones.
                - Primary ossification centres first develop at the diaphyses 3-4 months into embryonic development
                - Secondary ossification centre develops near epiphyses, leaving articular cartilage, and an underlying epiphyseal plate that constantly supply cartilage for endochondral ossification 0-5 y/o
                - When the two ossification centres meet, i.e. loss of epiphyseal plate, bone growth terminates.
- [[Evergreen note maintenance approximates spaced repetition]]
    - Because evergreen notes are densely linked, it introduces serendipity to your note-taking system, and the serendipity nature *************approximates************* spaced repetition.
    - This is, however, an inefficient spaced repetition system, as generally notes of related topics would emerge.
    - For me, this has been sufficient, for a number of reasons
        - I believe I’m blessed with a relatively good memory
        - Evergreen note taking has enforced better understanding, which helps flatten the forgetting curve
        - In addition to relying only on the serendipity offered by evergreen notes, I use a task manager, Sorted3, to space out review of large topics, I.e. Anatomy pf upper limb- Review 6 would be my 6th review of the index note (MOC) titled ‘Anatomy of the upper limb’.