# 9 Oct 2022

Created at: October 9, 2022 11:19 AM

- [[Femur]]
    - The femur forms the bony framework of the thigh.
    - The femur is classified as a long bone, it is the longest and heaviest bone in the body.
    - Proximal end
        - The proximal end of the femur consist of a head, which is 2/3 of a spherical structure that articulates with the acetabulum of the pelvic girdle at the hip joint.
        - Immediately distal to the head is the neck, a cylindrical strut that connects the head to the shaft of the femur
        - The proximal ends of the shaft is marked by the greater and lesser trochanter
            - The greater trochanter is an elevated ridge that points anterolaterally, whereas the lesser trochanter is a smaller structure that points posteromedially
            - The greater trochanter and lesser trochanter is connected anteriorly by a ridge called the intertrochanteric line
            - Connected posteriorly by a ridge called the intertrochanteric crest, marked by the quadrate tubercle.
            - The gluteal tuberosity is present on the posterior surface, and continues with the linea asperas of the shaft
    - Shaft
        - The posterior surface of the femur shaft is marked by the linea asperas, an elevated crest that serves as the posterior border of the shaft.
    - Distal end
        - The distal end separates into the latearal condyle and the medial condyle
        - Epicondyles are the non articular surfaces of the condyles, for attachment of the collateral ligaments of the knee joint.
        - The anterior surface of the condyle serves as the patellar surface, the inferior consist of an intercondylar fossa between the two condyles
    - 2 angles should be known:
        - The angle of inclination (angle between the long axis of the neck and the shaft) normal is 125.
        - Coxa valga (angle too large) and coxa vara (angle too small)
        - Angle of anteversion or femoral torsion, the shaft of the femur should run laterally to medially at a 12 degree angle with respect with the distal end of the femur.
- [[Patella]]
    - The patella is the largest sessemoid bone in the body which forms the knee cap
    - The anterior surface nothing special, just the apex
    - The posterior surface is lined with cartilage, and is separated into the lateral articular facet and the medial articular facet, which articulates to the corresponding condyles. The lateral articular facet is larger than the medial articular facet.
    - Note that superiorly the patella serves as the attachment of the quadriceps tendon.
    - Inferiorly attached to the ligamentum patellae. Infact, the ligamentum patellae is a continuation of the quadricep tendon that inserts into the tibial tuberosity of the [[Tibia]]. The patella, similar to othe sessaoid bones is enclosed within a tendon.
- [[Tibia]]
    - The tibia forms the bony framework of the leg. It occupies the medial position with respect to the smaller fibula.
    - Proximal
        - Marked by the lateral and medial condyles, and the intercondylar eminence in the middle.
        - On the anterior surface, a projection called the tibial tuberosity (is the part where we kneel on, not the patella)
    - Shaft
        - Posteriorly marked by a ridge called the soleal line, which runs laterally to medially. Separates the soleus
    - Distal
        - A bony projection that extends distally on the medial end, forms the medial maleolus (forms the ankle), it articulates with one of the large tarsal bones, the tallus, which is part of the ankle joint.
- [[Fibula]]
    - The fibula consist of a head
- [[Bones of the foot and the arches of the foot]]
    - 3 sets of bones form the bony framework of the foot:
        - The tarsals - 2 large tarsal bones and 5 small tarsal bones
        - The metatarsals - 5 metatarsals forming the metatarsum
        - Phalanges - 2 for the big toe and 3 for the other digits
    - The large tarsals
        - The calcaneus occupies the lateral position and forms the heal
        - The tallus occupies the medial position and sits on top of the calcaneus. It is largely involved in the ankle joint.
    - Smaller tarsals
        - Navicular (medial, infront of tarsal, boat shaped),cumeforms (medial, intermediate and lateral) (wedge shape)
        - Cuboid bone, lateral, in front of calcaneous