# 9 Sept 2022

Created at: September 9, 2022 2:00 AM

Liver - Right up hyperchondrium extend to left uper hyperchondrium

Spleen lies on the left, deep to posterior part of 9th to 11th ribs

- Haven’t done any deep work since [[7 Sept 2022]] 6pm, time to start now
    - An hour to complete the last e-learning set, the remaining time before staycation will be allocated to complete understanding anatomy and start some physiology notes
- GIS02: Innervation, blood supply and lymphatic drainage of the GI tract
    - The GI tract is located in the abdominal cavity, much of which is enclosed in the peritoneal cavity.
    - The peritoneum is a serous cavity, lined with simple squamous mesothelial cells. It lines the inner surface of the abdominal wall (parietal peritoneum) and the surace of abdominal (intraperitoneal?) viscera (visceral peritoneum).
    - Visceral peritoneum and parietal peritoneum MAY BE continuous at messentaries, a connective tissue structure that conveys arteries, veins, nerves and lymphatics. *Mesenteries are peritoneal formations that suspend the gut tub in the abdominal cavity.*
    - Other than being suspended in the peritoneal cavity by mesenteries, abdominal organs may also be located outside the peritoneum cavity (only one surface of viscera being lined with visceral peritoneum), these organs are said to be retroperitoneal.
    - Mesenteries
        - Three types of mesenteries
            - Mesenteries (peritoneal folds that connect the viscera to the posterior abdominal wall) - Mesentery of the small intestine, transverse mesocolon, sigmoid mesocolon
            - Ligaments (mesenteries that connect two organs) - splenorenal ligament, gastrophrenic ligament
            - Omentum - Greater omentum, lesser Omentum
        - Function of mesenteries - convey neurovascular structures and ducts to and from the viscera, to fix the viscera in place
    - Peritoneum
        - The peritoneum cavity is a potential space in the abdomen. It is subdivided into the greater sac and the omental bursa, which are continuous at the omental foramen.
        - The greater sac accounts for most of the space in the peritoneal cavity, bordered superiorly by the diaphragm continues inferiorly into the pelvic cavity.
        - The lesser sac/omental bursa is posterior to the stomach, the liver and the lesser omentum. It is continuous with the greater sac at the omental foramen (epiploic)
    - Greater omentum
        - A two fold peritoneal structure that is an apron-like structure. It arises from the greater curvature and the first part of the duodenum, and an inferior free edge that drapes the transverse colon, the jejunum and the ileum. Posteriorly, it extends to the superior surface of the transverse colon
    - Lesser omentum
        - Another two fold peritoneal structure that extends from the lesser curvature of the stomach and the superior part of the first part of the duodenum and to the inferior surface of the liver.