# Boron & Boulpaep Chapter 20: Types of capillaries (also related: @CPR28: Histology and function of blood vessels)

Created time: March 4, 2022 2:40 PM

**True capillaries** (inner radius, 2 to 5 µm) consist of a single layer of endothelial cells surrounded by a basement membrane, a fine network of reticular collagen fibers, and—in some tissues—pericytes. The endothelial cells have a smooth surface and are extremely thin (as little as 200 to 300 nm in height), except at the nucleus. The thickness and density of the capillary **basement membrane** vary among organs. Where large transcapillary pressures occur or other large mechanical forces exist, the basement membrane is thickest. Some endothelial cells have, on both luminal and basal surfaces, numerous **pits** called **caveolae** (see [pp. 42–43](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9781455743773000021?scrollTo=%23s0210) ) that are involved in ligand binding. Fluid-phase and receptor-mediated endocytosis (see [pp. 41–42](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9781455743773000021?scrollTo=%23p1060) ) can result in 70-nm **caveolin-coated vesicles.** In addition, the cytoplasm of capillary endothelial cells is rich in other endocytotic (pinocytotic) **vesicles** that contribute to the transcytosis of water and water-soluble compounds across the endothelial wall. In some cases, the endocytotic vesicles are lined up in a string and even appear linked together to form a **transendothelial channel.**

Linking endothelial cells together are **interendothelial junctions** ( [Fig. 20-2](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0015) ) where the two cell membranes are ~10 nm apart, although there may be constricted regions where the space or **cleft** between the two cells forms **adhering junctions** only ~4 nm wide. **Tight junctions** (see [pp. 43–44](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9781455743773000021?scrollTo=%23p1155) ) may also be present in which the apposed cell membranes appear to fuse, and **claudins** 1, 3, and 5 (CLDN1, CLDN3, CLDN5; see [pp. 43–44](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9781455743773000021?scrollTo=%23p1155) ) as well as **occludin** seal the gap. CLDN5 is quite specific for endothelial cells. Occludin is not found in all endothelia.

Open full size imageFigure 20-2Capillary endothelial junctions. This electron micrograph shows the interendothelial junction between two endothelial cells in a muscle capillary. Arrows point to tight junctions.(From Fawcett DW: A Textbook of Histology, 12th ed. New York, Chapman & Hall, 1994, p 964.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20110061677/B9781455743773000203/f020-002-9781455743773.jpg?Signature=PtIDtCMhJo68JnaRaHEO3kBymgG2TflHJHLOcmBCMP-N%7EYBLtTA6VB5R4NsFguufPQSoSVZXq6LVG0ziEYTZeN32JqTSnqml8ido8vyAwbp7WbBgu%7EeSikSfsG2C06YcyXuUj2mAUhZdfkS5PXIEeWAA-0rwmIhzvAOXFhQ2y8E_&Expires=1646378894&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20110061677/B9781455743773000203/f020-002-9781455743773.jpg?Signature=PtIDtCMhJo68JnaRaHEO3kBymgG2TflHJHLOcmBCMP-N%7EYBLtTA6VB5R4NsFguufPQSoSVZXq6LVG0ziEYTZeN32JqTSnqml8ido8vyAwbp7WbBgu%7EeSikSfsG2C06YcyXuUj2mAUhZdfkS5PXIEeWAA-0rwmIhzvAOXFhQ2y8E_&Expires=1646378894&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

Some endothelial cells have membrane-lined, cylindrical conduits— **fenestrations** —that run completely through the cell, from the capillary lumen to the interstitial space. These fenestrations are 50 to 80 nm in diameter and are seen primarily in tissues with large fluid and solute fluxes across the capillary walls (e.g., intestine, choroid plexus, exocrine glands, and renal glomeruli). A thin diaphragm often closes the perforations of the fenestrae (e.g., in intestinal capillaries).

The endothelia of the sinusoidal capillaries in the liver, bone marrow, and spleen have very large fenestrations as well as **gaps** 100 to 1000 nm wide *between* adjacent cells. Vesicles, transendothelial channels, fenestrae, and gaps—as well as structures of intermediate appearance—are part of a spectrum of regulated permeation across the endothelial cells.

Capillaries fall into three groups, based on their degree of leakiness ( [Fig. 20-3](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0020) ).

- **Continuous capillary.** This is the most common form of capillary, with interendothelial junctions 10 to 15 nm wide (e.g., skeletal muscle). However, these clefts are absent in the blood-brain barrier (see [p. 284](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9781455743773000112?scrollTo=%23p0235) ), whose capillaries have narrow tight junctions.
- **Fenestrated capillary.** In these capillaries, the endothelial cells are thin and perforated with fenestrations. These capillaries most often surround epithelia (e.g., small intestine, exocrine glands).
- **Discontinuous capillary.** In addition to fenestrae, these capillaries have large gaps. Discontinuous capillaries are found in sinusoids (e.g., liver).

Open full size imageFigure 20-3Three types of capillaries.

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20110061677/B9781455743773000203/f020-003-9781455743773.jpg?Signature=f5qS5bh9ZSESmvy280kBF44l0ZNWiTkeDAUxHE0Cl85oAGhG3D3Ddy2UI2xemjnoXgNHEqel%7ELzo4AQrlnSGz9VyAyVe7bpMvxkGkBw9PLf4rH31KAXz0rZ-mtyu-MwXSCHo7VKWmr05Sn8SJzM12cCtS4HzAyrG51uJRyO2oUI_&Expires=1646378894&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20110061677/B9781455743773000203/f020-003-9781455743773.jpg?Signature=f5qS5bh9ZSESmvy280kBF44l0ZNWiTkeDAUxHE0Cl85oAGhG3D3Ddy2UI2xemjnoXgNHEqel%7ELzo4AQrlnSGz9VyAyVe7bpMvxkGkBw9PLf4rH31KAXz0rZ-mtyu-MwXSCHo7VKWmr05Sn8SJzM12cCtS4HzAyrG51uJRyO2oUI_&Expires=1646378894&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)