# Cardiovascular physiology Chapter 5: Factors affecting aortic pulse pressure

Created time: March 3, 2022 6:01 PM

****Aortic Pulse Pressure****

As blood flows down the aorta and into distributing arteries, characteristic changes take place in the shape of the pressure wave contour. As the pressure pulse moves away from the heart, the systolic pressure rises, and the diastolic pressure falls (see Fig. 5-2). The change in the shape of the pressure pulse is related to a number of factors including (1) decreased compliance of distal arteries and (2) reflective waves, particularly from arterial branch points, which summate with the pulse wave traveling down the aorta and arteries. In addition, mean arterial pressure declines as the pressure pulse travels down distributing arteries owing to the resistance of the arteries; however, the reduction in mean pressure is small (just a few mm Hg) because the distributing arteries have a relatively low resistance. Therefore, the values measured for arterial pressure differ depending on the site of measurement. When the arterial pressure is measured using a sphygmomanometer (i.e., blood pressure cuff) on the upper arm, the pressure measurement represents the pressure within the brachial artery. The measured pressures, however, are not identical with the systolic and diastolic pressures found in the aorta or the pressures measured in other distributing arteries. For example, the systolic pressure in the brachial artery of the upper arm is about 10% lower than the systolic pressure in the ankle. As described in [Chapter 9](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/content.aspx?legacySectionId=klabunde3-klabunde-3-klabunde-ch009), a reduction in this ratio of ankle-to-brachial systolic pressures is used to evaluate the presence of arterial disease in the leg.

The compliance of the aorta and the ventricular stroke volume determine pulse pressure. **Compliance** is defined by the relationship between volume and pressure, in which compliance (C) equals the slope of that relationship, or the change in volume (ΔV) divided by the change in pressure (ΔP) at a given pressure:

![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch005_i004_1609226482.41925.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=DSLB12VjbjFVqHGQY-VbYeGu~f-v4ut7ibeLlUVyB00PvqNBwLNkJaSoVSKKco7xsrBEHMJxgQ54TVg1-Z4w7rZ8CeOEHp5ynZFZbn22WYa5-k8MjbKPU15g3uL9FTPTmpzojr7UR0Y~lVtU~cr0DcIP~U32JB0V3IeCImV5JGe~s4w~cPrWx0iGYxCTHWZTnr3agtFRhLdPONMJ-VerRz0-Z1VwSGd8NNftLQ8c4ZT11kL8TugZwYyUFeS8yPp54ssrfbdsJDfp55WUEV6kielP2mPOE6xOmeydqYrMaogzXAAJNcm6y6Kgq0~UeKCoxsG8vLIaAHWuxlCefd9CDQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch005_i004_1609226482.41925.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=DSLB12VjbjFVqHGQY-VbYeGu~f-v4ut7ibeLlUVyB00PvqNBwLNkJaSoVSKKco7xsrBEHMJxgQ54TVg1-Z4w7rZ8CeOEHp5ynZFZbn22WYa5-k8MjbKPU15g3uL9FTPTmpzojr7UR0Y~lVtU~cr0DcIP~U32JB0V3IeCImV5JGe~s4w~cPrWx0iGYxCTHWZTnr3agtFRhLdPONMJ-VerRz0-Z1VwSGd8NNftLQ8c4ZT11kL8TugZwYyUFeS8yPp54ssrfbdsJDfp55WUEV6kielP2mPOE6xOmeydqYrMaogzXAAJNcm6y6Kgq0~UeKCoxsG8vLIaAHWuxlCefd9CDQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)

Therefore, a highly compliant vessel will display a relatively small increase in pressure for a given increase in volume. Conversely, a less compliant vessel (i.e., “stiffer” vessel) will display a relatively large increase in pressure for a given increase in volume.

The compliance of a blood vessel is determined in large part by the relative proportion of elastin fibers versus smooth muscle and collagen in the vessel wall (see [Fig. 2-7](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/content.aspx?legacySectionId=klabunde3-klabunde-3-klabunde-ch002-fig007)). Elastin fibers offer the least resistance to stretch, whereas collagen offers the greatest resistance. A vessel such as the aorta that has a greater proportion of elastin fibers versus smooth muscle and collagen has a relatively low resistance to stretch and, therefore, has a compliance that is greater than that found in a muscular artery that has more smooth muscle and less elastin.

The relatively high compliance of the aorta dampens the pulsatile output of the left ventricle, thereby reducing the pulse pressure. If the aorta were a rigid tube, the pulse pressure would be very high with each ventricular ejection. However, as blood is ejected into the aorta, the walls of the aorta expand to accommodate the increase in blood volume contained within the aorta because the aorta is compliant. As the aorta expands, the increase in pressure is determined by the change in aortic volume divided by the compliance of the aorta at that particular range of volumes (Fig. 5-5, panel A). The less compliant the aorta, the greater the pressure change (i.e., pulse pressure) at any given change in aortic volume (Fig. 5-5, panel B). Age and arteriosclerotic disease decrease aortic compliance, which increases aortic pulse pressure. It is not uncommon for elderly people to have aortic pulse pressures of 60 mm Hg or more, whereas younger adults have aortic pulse pressures of about 40 to 45 mm Hg at resting heart rates.

**FIGURE 5-5**

![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch005_f005_1609226482.44924.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=ZWcq6x6WUreA29tMtFBDnfilyFNJNXtKvRGXWHSdLqLfVMHyj8sVGB2wyqYET55JvqtqrCtrIFGj6ODmkMglk0-BWW-moyJLDOOD0yDgbnMUCugUo9wM2yEwwC4Xpl9RSu~PloeUJWPseqJXyjAa0KsE~PTuEBU8aRp3pDdIluMTXvTnM1x~~SfUjjN1lyZsIOuTfoXUvIxWQWwcRg8rLLGSXGMfpFDQKCr2YzhJLFDNn8WqaoKIjlsvg6WCOrApZMcCx6AChc0DkDgmtdrTdvx0kSiHyeEAfNsHJrYbkcdSF59PW4tqcP3I~O4v-e5uVQK45MpUTV6fSxJXMKbM9Q__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch005_f005_1609226482.44924.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=ZWcq6x6WUreA29tMtFBDnfilyFNJNXtKvRGXWHSdLqLfVMHyj8sVGB2wyqYET55JvqtqrCtrIFGj6ODmkMglk0-BWW-moyJLDOOD0yDgbnMUCugUo9wM2yEwwC4Xpl9RSu~PloeUJWPseqJXyjAa0KsE~PTuEBU8aRp3pDdIluMTXvTnM1x~~SfUjjN1lyZsIOuTfoXUvIxWQWwcRg8rLLGSXGMfpFDQKCr2YzhJLFDNn8WqaoKIjlsvg6WCOrApZMcCx6AChc0DkDgmtdrTdvx0kSiHyeEAfNsHJrYbkcdSF59PW4tqcP3I~O4v-e5uVQK45MpUTV6fSxJXMKbM9Q__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)

[View Original](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/klabunde9781975150075-ch005_f005_1609226482.44924.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=HEfeFJcqY1vS2rO9zfl1P6rbacM6OI65jRnprtGR5uaMUxBf2sNY4hym88Bs5wTdRRuE0kTc4yx54Zs7vIXY7k1KBwpzrWdnCOMN5fedj-xDKwQLaZZMtwUBWMOg6-iYNTIKLYeZQzlOpizitV~a4dEFhaynPT2m5AUYKRhyml6-C9pggtBcCZX~nJRSFvIjI~kO9ETqxkLNdjLuM7SgePB56vAuKmW~KW0bFtOOGj2TizsRmuCWVvjl4yxonOagipvybwFsD~M7gTHgcXKKv8CeQZRAMj5xpLum3tTzoKQaei0mMqKms-M6yA-52gNdmVLQf~EsUshZ9hIXG5DJlA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)[Download Slide (.ppt)](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/downloadimage.aspx?sec=249890604&image=https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/klabunde9781975150075-ch005_f005_1609226482.44924.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=HEfeFJcqY1vS2rO9zfl1P6rbacM6OI65jRnprtGR5uaMUxBf2sNY4hym88Bs5wTdRRuE0kTc4yx54Zs7vIXY7k1KBwpzrWdnCOMN5fedj-xDKwQLaZZMtwUBWMOg6-iYNTIKLYeZQzlOpizitV~a4dEFhaynPT2m5AUYKRhyml6-C9pggtBcCZX~nJRSFvIjI~kO9ETqxkLNdjLuM7SgePB56vAuKmW~KW0bFtOOGj2TizsRmuCWVvjl4yxonOagipvybwFsD~M7gTHgcXKKv8CeQZRAMj5xpLum3tTzoKQaei0mMqKms-M6yA-52gNdmVLQf~EsUshZ9hIXG5DJlA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA&ChapterSecID=249890556&BookID=3021)

**Effects of stroke volume, aortic compliance, and mean aortic pressure on aortic pulse pressure.**

**Panel A.** At a given stroke volume (DV), the pulse pressure (DP) is determined by the aortic compliance (*red curve*). **Panel B.** Decreasing the aortic compliance (slope of *red curve*) increases the pulse pressure at a given stroke volume. **Panel C.** Increasing the stroke volume into the aorta increases the pulse pressure. **Panel D.** At higher mean aortic pressures (*dotted line*), a given stroke volume produces a greater pulse pressure because the aortic compliance is less at higher pressures and volumes. **Panels A–C** assume a constant mean aortic pressure (*dotted line*).

A change in compliance affects only pulse pressure and not the mean pressure, which remains unchanged as long as cardiac output and SVR do not change. In contrast, a change in stroke volume normally changes MAP in addition to pulse pressure because the cardiac output changes. For example, if stroke volume and cardiac output are increased by an increase in inotropy, both pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure increase. If, however, cardiac output is not changed when stroke volume changes (e.g., if a decrease in heart rate accompanies the increase in stroke volume), then only the pulse pressure changes—the MAP does not change (Fig. 5-5, panel C).

No single value for aortic compliance exists because the relationship between volume and pressure (compliance curve; red line in Fig. 5-5) is not linear. At higher aortic volumes and pressures, the slope of the relationship decreases and compliance decreases (see Fig. 5-5, panel D). Therefore, at elevated mean arterial pressures, the reduced compliance results in an increase in pulse pressure at a given stroke volume.

In summary, aortic pulse pressure is determined by ventricular stroke volume and aortic compliance (Fig. 5-6). Any factor that changes stroke volume (e.g., ventricular preload, afterload, and inotropy; heart rate) or aortic compliance (e.g., age, arteriosclerosis, hypertension) alters aortic pulse pressure. Beat-to-beat changes in pulse pressure occur owing to changes in stroke volume. In contrast, chronic, long-term increases in pulse pressure are commonly due to decreased aortic compliance.