# Cardiovascular physiology concept Chapter 8: Capillary exchange model

Created time: March 4, 2022 5:35 PM

****Capillary Exchange Model****

Capillary fluid exchange can be modeled as shown in Figure 8-9. This model assumes that the following values remain constant along capillary length: Pi = 1 mm Hg, πc = 25 mm Hg, πi = 6 mm Hg, and σ = 1. According to [Equation 8-6](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/content.aspx?sectionid=249891188&bookid=3021#klabunde3-klabunde-3-klabunde-ch008-equat006), if Pc is 30 mm Hg at the entrance to the capillary and falls linearly to 15 mm Hg at the end of the capillary, the NDF changes from +10 at the entrance of the capillary to −5 at the end of the capillary. Filtration occurs along most of the length of the capillary wherever NDF is greater than zero. Reabsorption occurs where NDF is less than zero, which is near the venular end of the capillary. Net fluid movement is zero at the point along the capillary where NDF = 0. Experimental studies have shown that the hydraulic conductivity in single capillaries increases severalfold from the arteriolar to the venular end of the capillary. Therefore, significant reabsorption can still occur at the distal end of a capillary when the NDF is only slightly negative.

**FIGURE 8-9**

![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch008_f009_1609226518.57548.jpeg?Expires=1649397162&Signature=xps-dcD0z3nEEA6IR0uL5FuJsSv3yf6mIv8X7WRYmRppXXnyzOP6QCyXUoGyqrUvUCRzoMOu5S4SDXXtr0UpEPZu8KpznJWG8U9sv5bWhi0Nlh1WcFjWr6GrvL2kaBWLQZI1N2VdhWRxIWVMadWwM3VHesuZq51W2A2ng7JzTbQGGx9RaPgE71A0mRmk5lN1i3x5GsTvA6uVMHjTpjPn5V3HDCQZXxbFpgkv~5EaTnCmlMEIS~vqwsv6iAeUZ5y6XqO0FcqVrY7T98dTURo66kmXE85ojJnRNXtyYBSrZzM9g8JOaGjlyO841gljqsyKW9tmYHEbrZWdgtFsOWrTdg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch008_f009_1609226518.57548.jpeg?Expires=1649397162&Signature=xps-dcD0z3nEEA6IR0uL5FuJsSv3yf6mIv8X7WRYmRppXXnyzOP6QCyXUoGyqrUvUCRzoMOu5S4SDXXtr0UpEPZu8KpznJWG8U9sv5bWhi0Nlh1WcFjWr6GrvL2kaBWLQZI1N2VdhWRxIWVMadWwM3VHesuZq51W2A2ng7JzTbQGGx9RaPgE71A0mRmk5lN1i3x5GsTvA6uVMHjTpjPn5V3HDCQZXxbFpgkv~5EaTnCmlMEIS~vqwsv6iAeUZ5y6XqO0FcqVrY7T98dTURo66kmXE85ojJnRNXtyYBSrZzM9g8JOaGjlyO841gljqsyKW9tmYHEbrZWdgtFsOWrTdg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)

[View Original](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/klabunde9781975150075-ch008_f009_1609226518.57548.jpeg?Expires=1649397162&Signature=tlR5SlDpZBgajWXtVhPXSce-krnOoZy9oNhpiLVYyevQmLn2KpgKB2YoyZ~hoMuhsvlIkRVZudB98XWO4~VNGkFtGKohFtXXlm8L2dgVNRLt2cSW~bxrUN5kdKJbZvkAtRLREHqqFm0kQ-mwyNgSPSMx1Q8ulEtBQYR6kUVD66hhlTKoyoxra6njxXfphDFU59Jkd9LhQCPSnZsnjV5O0fpztiLxDbq7bennQBvWRG4d4NjrE53syykNkLCFIxb9GDcNrvMKe3hUeG3Yg3mKMvoAPW4erHtTXYAZHpnvvYvaXxMw4me454I4LKKW8XJlM549sWA3c83ecfTWr336AQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)[Download Slide (.ppt)](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/downloadimage.aspx?sec=249891284&image=https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/klabunde9781975150075-ch008_f009_1609226518.57548.jpeg?Expires=1649397162&Signature=tlR5SlDpZBgajWXtVhPXSce-krnOoZy9oNhpiLVYyevQmLn2KpgKB2YoyZ~hoMuhsvlIkRVZudB98XWO4~VNGkFtGKohFtXXlm8L2dgVNRLt2cSW~bxrUN5kdKJbZvkAtRLREHqqFm0kQ-mwyNgSPSMx1Q8ulEtBQYR6kUVD66hhlTKoyoxra6njxXfphDFU59Jkd9LhQCPSnZsnjV5O0fpztiLxDbq7bennQBvWRG4d4NjrE53syykNkLCFIxb9GDcNrvMKe3hUeG3Yg3mKMvoAPW4erHtTXYAZHpnvvYvaXxMw4me454I4LKKW8XJlM549sWA3c83ecfTWr336AQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA&ChapterSecID=249891188&BookID=3021)

**Model of capillary fluid exchange.**

Assuming that Pi = 1, πc = 25, πi = 6 mm Hg, and σ = 1, and assuming that capillary hydrostatic pressure (*Pc*) at the beginning and end of the capillary are 30 mm Hg and 15 mm Hg, respectively, the net driving force [NDF = (Pc − Pi) − (πc − πi)] is greater than zero along most of the length of the capillary, which causes filtration (*Filtr*) to occur. Near the venular end of the capillary, the *NDF* is less than zero and reabsorption (*Reab*) occurs.

This model is highly simplified because it assumes that Pi, πc, and πi remain constant, which does not occur in vivo. As fluid leaves the arteriolar end of the capillary, πc increases, Pi increases, and πi decreases. These changes oppose the filtration. For most capillaries, the fraction of fluid filtered from the capillary (filtration fraction) is <1%, so Pi, πc, and πi do not change appreciably, except for perhaps πi because of proteins associated with the glycocalyx. Renal capillaries, however, are different because the filtration fraction in these capillaries is very high (~20%), which leads to significant increases in plasma oncotic pressure. In nonrenal capillaries, if capillary permeability is increased, or if capillary hydrostatic pressure is increased to high levels by venous occlusion or heart failure, the increase in filtration can lead to significant changes in Pi, πc, and πi in a manner that opposes and therefore limits the net filtration of fluid.

Lymphatics (not shown in Fig. 8-9) pick up excess filtered fluid and transport it out of the tissue. When net filtration increases, lymphatic flow also increases. The lymphatics, therefore, along with the dynamic changes in Pc, Pi, πc, and πi help to maintain a proper state of interstitial hydration and thereby prevent edema from occurring.

Finally, it is important to note that there is considerable heterogeneity among capillaries in terms of filtration and reabsorption. Some capillaries may filter along most or all of their length, whereas others may display reabsorption along most of their length. Furthermore, this can change depending on the balance of hydrostatic and oncotic forces, which can vary under different physiological and pathophysiological conditions. With arteriolar vasodilation or increased venous pressure, capillaries may filter along most or all of their length. Inflammation is accompanied by arteriolar vasodilation and increased capillary permeability, along with increased permeability of small postcapillary venules, which can become the major site of fluid filtration under inflammatory conditions.