# Cardiovascular physiology concepts Chapter 5: Effects of respiratory activity on venous return

Created time: March 3, 2022 10:13 AM

****Respiratory Activity (Abdominothoracic or Respiratory Pump)****

Venous return to the right atrium from the abdominal vena cava is determined by the pressure difference between the abdominal vena cava and the right atrial pressure, as well as by the resistance to flow, which is primarily determined by the diameter of the thoracic vena cava. Therefore, increasing right atrial pressure impedes venous return, whereas lowering right atrial pressure facilitates venous return. These changes in venous return significantly influence stroke volume through the Frank-Starling mechanism.

Pressures and volumes in the right atrium and thoracic vena cava depend on the surrounding **intrapleural pressure**. This pressure is measured in the space between the thoracic wall and the lungs and is generally negative (subatmospheric). During inspiration, the chest wall expands and the diaphragm descends (red arrows on the chest wall and diaphragm in Fig. 5-17). This causes the intrapleural pressure (Ppl) to become more negative, causing expansion of the lungs, atrial and ventricular chambers, and vena cava (smaller red arrows). This expansion decreases the pressures within the vessels and cardiac chambers. As right atrial pressure falls during inspiration, the pressure gradient for venous return to the heart from the abdominal vena cava is increased. During expiration, the opposite occurs, although the net effect of respiration is that the increased rate and depth of ventilation facilitates venous return and ventricular stroke volume.

**FIGURE 5-17**

![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch005_f017_1609226483.30467.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=JNoF8Kb6ldMvkhrawsqwItqMX1vZi52NARih10V7TAp~TYITQWb1eF0RaWWN5y-w0Rf6tnCvgOUrhdwtEI7Vhf8UzxH4IIqJhPaHhqm~hbT1f1hoTwfQSsqaITg5~qBx5xhHJPDr3YbTnTT83tuscqxQEiYOfqQepyZ96fxFJ~tWVAfByXUd5D4dSwHG-xdG7j1xrkWmRZoi6~Rh9Jr3cidLqT1YVcj~aIqIQ1KbqlfUkmUUrJ4qtJnLQrWtagbOuevTPkm6HicpiYKJ6o2znAQDB7Lyi1PeIkW-EAteu17aDXnBs7LbgFlFNiTnzMJPQB0LIcd8bpzLGeci0zLidw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/3021/m_klabunde9781975150075-ch005_f017_1609226483.30467.jpeg?Expires=1649228419&Signature=JNoF8Kb6ldMvkhrawsqwItqMX1vZi52NARih10V7TAp~TYITQWb1eF0RaWWN5y-w0Rf6tnCvgOUrhdwtEI7Vhf8UzxH4IIqJhPaHhqm~hbT1f1hoTwfQSsqaITg5~qBx5xhHJPDr3YbTnTT83tuscqxQEiYOfqQepyZ96fxFJ~tWVAfByXUd5D4dSwHG-xdG7j1xrkWmRZoi6~Rh9Jr3cidLqT1YVcj~aIqIQ1KbqlfUkmUUrJ4qtJnLQrWtagbOuevTPkm6HicpiYKJ6o2znAQDB7Lyi1PeIkW-EAteu17aDXnBs7LbgFlFNiTnzMJPQB0LIcd8bpzLGeci0zLidw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)

**Effects of respiration on venous return.**

**Left panel.** During inspiration, intrapleural pressure (*P*pl) decreases as the chest wall expands and the diaphragm descends (*large red arrows*). This increases the transmural pressure across the superior and inferior vena cava (*SVC* and *IVC*), right atrium (*RA*), and right ventricle (*RV*), which causes them to expand (*small red arrows*). This facilitates venous return and leads to an increase in atrial and ventricular filling and therefore preload. **Right panel.** During inspiration, *P*pl and right atrial pressure (*P*RA) become more negative, which increases venous return. During expiration, *P*pl and *P*RA become less negative and venous return falls. Numeric values for *P*pl and *P*RA are expressed as mm Hg.

Although it may appear paradoxical, the fall in right atrial pressure during inspiration is associated with an *increase* in right atrial and ventricular preloads and right ventricular stroke volume. This occurs because the fall in intrapleural pressure causes the transmural pressure to increase across the chamber walls. The **transmural pressure** is the difference between the pressure within the chamber and the pressure outside the chamber (Ppl) and is the pressure that distends the chamber. When transmural pressure increases during inspiration, the chamber volume increases, which increases sarcomere length and myocyte preload. For example, if intrapleural pressure is normally −4 mm Hg at end-expiration and right atrial pressure is 0 mm Hg, the transmural pressure (the pressure that distends the atrial chamber) is 4 mm Hg (see Fig. 5-17, right panel). During inspiration, if intrapleural pressure decreases to −8 mm Hg and atrial pressure decreases to −2 mm Hg, the transmural pressure across the atrial chamber increases from 4 to 6 mm Hg, thereby expanding the chamber. At the same time, because blood pressure within the atrium is diminished, this leads to an increase in venous return to the right atrium from the abdominal vena cava. Similar increases in right ventricular transmural pressure and preload occur during inspiration. The increase in sarcomere length during inspiration augments right ventricular stroke volume by the Frank-Starling mechanism. In addition, changes in intrapleural pressure during inspiration influence the left atrium and ventricle; however, the expanding lungs and pulmonary vasculature act as a capacitance reservoir (pulmonary blood volume increases) so that the left ventricular filling is not enhanced during inspiration. During expiration, however, blood is forced from the pulmonary vasculature into the left atrium and ventricle, thereby increasing left ventricular filling and stroke volume. *The net effect of respiration is that increasing the rate and depth of respiration increases venous return and cardiac output*.

If a person exhales forcefully against a closed glottis (**Valsalva maneuver**), intrapleural pressure becomes very positive, which causes the transmural pressure to become negative, thereby collapsing the thoracic vena cava. This dramatically increases resistance to venous return and reduces venous return. Because of the accompanying decrease in transmural pressure across the ventricular chamber walls, ventricular volume decreases (particularly the more compliant right ventricle) despite the large increase in the pressure within the chamber. Decreased chamber volume (i.e., decreased preload) leads to a fall in ventricular stroke volume by the Frank-Starling mechanism. Similar changes can occur when a person strains while having a bowel movement or when a person lifts a heavy weight while holding his or her breath.