# Guyton and Hall: Normal pacemaker of the heart

Created time: March 17, 2022 6:25 PM

- In discussing the genesis and transmission of the cardiac impulse through the heart, **we have noted that the impulse normally arises in the sinus node.** In some abnormal conditions, this is not the case. Other parts of the heart can also exhibit intrinsic rhythmical excitation in the same way as the sinus nodal fibers; this is particularly true of the A-V nodal and Purkinje fibers. The A-V nodal fibers, when not stimulated from some outside source, discharge at an intrinsic rhythmical rate of 40 to 60 times per minute, and the Purkinje fibers discharge at a rate somewhere between 15 and 40 times per minute. These rates are in contrast to the normal rate of the sinus node of 70 to 80 times per minute.  Thus, the sinus node controls the beat of the heart because its rate of rhythmical discharge is faster than that of any other part of the heart. Therefore, the sinus node is almost always the pacemaker of the normal heart.
    
    Why then does the sinus node rather than the A-V node or the Purkinje fibers control the heart’s rhythmicity? The answer derives from the fact that the discharge rate of the sinus node is considerably faster than the natural self-excitatory discharge rate of either the A-V node or the Purkinje fibers. Each time the sinus node discharges, its impulse is conducted into both the A-V node and Purkinje fibers, also discharging their excitable membranes. However, the sinus node discharges again before either the A-V node or Purkinje fibers can reach their own thresholds for self-excitation. Therefore, the new impulse from the sinus node discharges both the A-V node and Purkinje fibers before self-excitation can occur in either of these sites.
    
- Ectopic Pacemaker
    - Occasionally, some other part of the heart develops a rhythmical discharge rate that is more rapid than that of the sinus node. For example, this development sometimes occurs in the A-V node or in the Purkinje fibers when one of these becomes abnormal. In either case, the pacemaker of the heart shifts from the sinus node to the A-V node or to the excited Purkinje fibers. Under rarer conditions, a place in the atrial or ventricular muscle develops excessive excitability and becomes the pacemaker. A pacemaker elsewhere than the sinus node is called an ectopic pacemaker . An ectopic pacemaker causes an abnormal sequence of contraction of the different parts of the heart and can cause significant weakening of heart pumping. Another cause of shift of the pacemaker is blockage of transmission of the cardiac impulse from the sinus node to the other parts of the heart. The new pacemaker then usually occurs at the A-V node or in the penetrating portion of the A-V bundle on the way to the ventricles. When A-V block occurs—that is, when the cardiac impulse fails to pass from the atria into the ventricles through the A-V nodal and bundle system—the atria continue to beat at the normal rate of rhythm of the sinus node while a new pacemaker usually develops in the Purkinje system of the ventricles and drives the ventricular muscle at a new rate, somewhere between 15 and 40 beats per minute. After sudden A-V bundle block, the Purkinje system does not begin to emit its intrinsic rhythmical impulses until 5 to 20 seconds later because, before the blockage, the Purkinje fibers had been “overdriven” by the rapid sinus impulses and, consequently, are in a suppressed state. During these 5 to 20 seconds, the ventricles fail to pump blood, and the person faints after the first 4 to 5 seconds because of lack of blood flow to the brain. This delayed pickup of the heartbeat is called Stokes-Adams syndrome . If the delay period is too long, it can lead to death.