# Guyton and Hall: Sympathetic Nervous System Control of Renal Excretion: Arterial Baroreceptor And Low-Pressure Stretch Receptor Reflexes

Created time: March 15, 2022 4:03 PM
URL: https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/book/3-s2.0-B9780323597128000308?scrollTo=%23hl0000694

## Sympathetic Nervous System Control of Renal Excretion: Arterial Baroreceptor And Low-Pressure Stretch Receptor Reflexes

Because the kidneys receive extensive sympathetic innervation, changes in sympathetic activity can alter renal sodium and water excretion, as well as regulation of extracellular fluid volume under some conditions. For example, when blood volume is reduced by hemorrhage, pressures in the pulmonary blood vessels and other low-pressure regions of the thorax decrease, causing reflex activation of the sympathetic nervous system. This, in turn, increases renal sympathetic nerve activity, which has several effects to decrease sodium and water excretion: (1) constriction of the renal arterioles, which decreases GFR if the sympathetic activation is severe; (2) increased tubular reabsorption of salt and water; and (3) stimulation of renin release and increased Ang II and aldosterone formation, both of which further increase tubular reabsorption. If the reduction in blood volume is great enough to lower systemic arterial pressure, further activation of the sympathetic nervous system occurs because of decreased stretch of the arterial baroreceptors located in the carotid sinus and aortic arch. All these reflexes together play an important role in the rapid restitution of blood volume that occurs in acute conditions such as hemorrhage. Also, reflex inhibition of renal sympathetic activity may contribute to the rapid elimination of excess fluid in the circulation that occurs after eating a meal that contains large amounts of salt and water.

Excessive and inappropriate activation of the sympathetic nervous system, however, can lead to a cascade of effects, including increases in renin secretion, Ang II formation, and renal sodium reabsorption that elevate blood pressure. In fact, ablation of the renal sympathetic nerves often lowers arterial pressure in hypertension, especially when associated with obesity.