# Guyton and Hall: Aldosterone Stimulates Renal Sodium Reabsorption and Potassium Secretion

Created time: March 15, 2022 5:41 PM

## Aldosterone Stimulates Renal Sodium Reabsorption and Potassium Secretion

Aldosterone, secreted by the zona glomerulosa cells of the adrenal cortex, is an important regulator of sodium reabsorption and secretion of potassium and hydrogen ions by the renal tubules. *A major renal tubular site of aldosterone action is on the principal cells of the cortical collecting tubule* . The mechanism whereby aldosterone increases sodium reabsorption and potassium secretion is by stimulating the Na + -K + ATPase pump on the basolateral side of the cortical collecting tubule membrane. Aldosterone also increases the sodium permeability of the luminal side of the membrane by the insertion of epithelial sodium channels. The cellular mechanisms of aldosterone action are discussed in [Chapter 78](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9780323597128000783) .

The most important stimuli for aldosterone are the following: (1) increased extracellular potassium concentration; and (2) increased angiotensin II levels, which typically occur in conditions associated with sodium and volume depletion or low blood pressure. Increased secretion of aldosterone associated with these conditions causes renal sodium and water retention, helping restore extracellular fluid volume and blood pressure toward normal.

When there is a deficit of aldosterone, as occurs with adrenal destruction or malfunction *(Addison disease)* , there is marked sodium loss from the body and accumulation of potassium. Conversely, excess aldosterone secretion, as occurs in patients with adrenal tumors *(Conn syndrome)* , is associated with sodium retention and decreased plasma potassium concentration due, in part, to excessive potassium secretion by the kidneys. Although daily regulation of sodium balance can be maintained as long as minimal levels of aldosterone are present, the inability to adjust aldosterone secretion appropriately greatly impairs the regulation of renal potassium excretion and potassium concentration of the body fluids. Thus, aldosterone is even more important as a regulator of potassium concentration than for sodium concentration, as discussed in [Chapter 30](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9780323597128000308) .