# Guyton: Heart Failure With Diastolic Dysfunction and Normal Ejection Fraction

Created time: May 12, 2022 3:13 PM

# Heart Failure With Diastolic Dysfunction and Normal Ejection Fraction

Our discussion thus far has focused mainly on cardiac failure due to decreased contractility of the myocardium following a myocardial infarction or impaired coronary blood flow. However, as discussed earlier in the chapter, heart failure can occur from any condition that decreases the heart’s ability to pump enough blood to meet the body’s needs. Heart failure associated with impaired cardiac contractility is often referred to as *systolic heart failure* or *heart failure with reduced ejection fraction* (HFrEF). As discussed in [Chapter 9](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9780323597128000096) , the ejection fraction (EF), often assessed by echocardiography, is the fraction of the end-diastolic volume of the left ventricle that is ejected with each contraction. An EF of 0.6 means that 60% of the end-diastolic volume ventricle is pumped with each heartbeat. Normal values for EF are considered to be from 50% to 70%. When the heart muscle is weakened, as a result of a myocardial infarction or impaired coronary blood flow, the EF is usually reduced, with values below 40% considered to be indicative of HFrEF.

Heart failure can also be associated with normal EF if the heart muscle becomes thickened and stiff ( *concentric hypertrophy* ), so that filling of the ventricles is impaired, and the ventricles hold a smaller than usual volume of blood. Under these conditions, the total amount of blood pumped by the heart may not be enough to meet the body’s needs, even though it is pumping with a normal or even increased EF. This condition is often referred to as *heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)* .

During the last 30 to 40 years, a growing proportion of heart failure patients have presented with HFpEF. Currently, over 50% of patients with heart failure patients have a normal EF. HFpEF occurs more commonly in women and older adults and especially in those who have obesity, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension, a constellation of disorders often called the *cardiometabolic syndrome* . In these individuals, diastolic dysfunction is characterized by impairment in the rate of ventricular filling, slowed relaxation of cardiomyocytes, increased thickness of the ventricular wall, proliferation of extracellular matrix, and fibrosis, which contribute to a stiffer left ventricle.

Although clinicians often classify patients into the categories of HFpEF or HFrEF using the EF threshold of 50%, most patients with advanced heart failure exhibit abnormalities of ventricular filling as well as impaired contractility and impaired systolic function. Most of the neurohumoral changes in heart failure that have been discussed, including activation of the sympathetic and renin-angiotensin system, as well as excessive fluid retention by the kidneys, occur regardless of whether there is normal or reduced EF. Heart failure is a heterogeneous syndrome, rather than a specific disease, and occurs whenever the heart is unable to pump enough blood to meet the needs of the body.

Thus, measurements of EF, although useful, do not always provide an accurate assessment of cardiac function. A small thick heart with impaired diastolic filling may be unable to pump the appropriate stroke volume and cardiac output to meet the body’s needs but could have a normal or elevated EF. This example illustrates the limitations of left ventricular EF as a marker of left ventricular function and as a means of categorizing patients with heart failure of different causes.