# Marks’ Biochemistry: Transport of dietary lipids in blood

Created time: April 4, 2022 11:00 AM

### Summary

- Nascent chylomicrons become mature chylomicrons once they receive Apo from HDL (ApoCII, ApoE)
- ApoCII function: Activate LPL, which enables offload of lipids into tissues
- FA produced either oxidised by tissues, or for lipogenesis, or complex with albumin and travel in blood
- Main fate of glycerol is uptake by liver for TAG synthesis
- ApoCII is transferred back to HDL after hydrolysis, exposing ApoE, enabling chylomicron remnant endocytosis

## **Transport of Dietary Lipids in the Blood**

By the process of exocytosis, nascent chylomicrons are secreted by the intestinal epithelial cells into the chyle of the lymphatic system and enter the blood through the thoracic duct. Nascent chylomicrons begin to enter the blood within 1 to 2 hours after the start of a meal; as the meal is digested and absorbed, they continue to enter the blood for many hours. Initially, the particles are called nascent (newborn) chylomicrons. As they accept proteins from *HDL* within the lymph and the blood, they become “mature” chylomicrons. HDL is the lipoprotein particle with the highest concentration of proteins, and lowest concentration of triacylglycerol (see [Chapter 32](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/content.aspx?legacySectionId=lieberman5-lieberman-5-lieberman-ch032) for further discussion of HDL and other lipoprotein particles found in the body).

Because of their high triacylglycerol content, chylomicrons are the least dense of the blood lipoproteins. When blood is collected from patients with certain types of hyperlipoproteinemias (high concentrations of lipoproteins in the blood) in which chylomicron levels are elevated, and the blood is allowed to stand in the refrigerator overnight, the chylomicrons float to the top of the liquid and coalesce, forming a creamy layer.

HDL transfers proteins to the nascent chylomicrons, particularly apoE and apoCII (Fig. 29.10). ApoE is recognized by membrane receptors, particularly those on the surface of liver cells, allowing apoE-bearing lipoproteins to enter these cells by endocytosis for subsequent digestion by lysosomes. ApoCII acts as an activator of *LPL*, the enzyme on capillary endothelial cells, primarily within muscle and adipose tissue, that digests the triacylglycerols of the chylomicrons and VLDL in the blood.

**FIGURE 29.10**

![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/m_lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f011_1602178814.70975.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=qv3vIg1hCmt6ALKfvua0pmLQTPA~mpTWt658MqCkpRhUh0Ju-jZ96FvJpgc6ysebocLg6Lk6djfiSX87-RO7QGclc3QKzbUAkMXZZd-2RF7LvlRXu1tI3cPgkHssDJfxLkktZtQBBLnQgabUmEVYrtlw1oA93fMfbTQ6Fk0k79j6CVsF6tzd~RnPr3tL4XTtCFxh2SpduIy9ty~vgfV6LL-6wklEKDJ2acNaQW1QirHivxV-1m-vUzCvgmHmbmysnYP4XOe9qXGco8Wl88jdF6iha19Axv0qSI5pORJNdkk580-fGtoSg3ow6r5wpAoJWqAvnL-HdvDnx5YpSeUYKA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/m_lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f011_1602178814.70975.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=qv3vIg1hCmt6ALKfvua0pmLQTPA~mpTWt658MqCkpRhUh0Ju-jZ96FvJpgc6ysebocLg6Lk6djfiSX87-RO7QGclc3QKzbUAkMXZZd-2RF7LvlRXu1tI3cPgkHssDJfxLkktZtQBBLnQgabUmEVYrtlw1oA93fMfbTQ6Fk0k79j6CVsF6tzd~RnPr3tL4XTtCFxh2SpduIy9ty~vgfV6LL-6wklEKDJ2acNaQW1QirHivxV-1m-vUzCvgmHmbmysnYP4XOe9qXGco8Wl88jdF6iha19Axv0qSI5pORJNdkk580-fGtoSg3ow6r5wpAoJWqAvnL-HdvDnx5YpSeUYKA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)

[View Original](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f011_1602178814.70975.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=poLu28jsqxUbzzDCTasoZdV5~4eGK57L~RMm-jZ8wPzDVMlB0oChB6A1k2W57bX5sKbzkRmbjqrkkNlv7ijQ6pOwQfBJXUYb-dzajjrG4MIisYaUl4GUBNVkXILJKmHFZGlpafCiYuTPl543~fmWw2rqo~-sutkdvG78P~VBnZPjp8MR224Kl6qeUHP~qMx4CZPGBqahz2d-~rWOaBnaN-OsU-lq7XWruIBCsnFTnR3wLjrcvcACmNpLMXIhWAbbp-SRvoTPsqns5LcpQEfSSdtR6MsB3RuNXciqW6BndnKBVF5jKAwwmIoLBBQ0eBStbFMCIpXPKfOopDiBv4vaRw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)[Download Slide (.ppt)](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/downloadimage.aspx?sec=249267419&image=https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f011_1602178814.70975.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=poLu28jsqxUbzzDCTasoZdV5~4eGK57L~RMm-jZ8wPzDVMlB0oChB6A1k2W57bX5sKbzkRmbjqrkkNlv7ijQ6pOwQfBJXUYb-dzajjrG4MIisYaUl4GUBNVkXILJKmHFZGlpafCiYuTPl543~fmWw2rqo~-sutkdvG78P~VBnZPjp8MR224Kl6qeUHP~qMx4CZPGBqahz2d-~rWOaBnaN-OsU-lq7XWruIBCsnFTnR3wLjrcvcACmNpLMXIhWAbbp-SRvoTPsqns5LcpQEfSSdtR6MsB3RuNXciqW6BndnKBVF5jKAwwmIoLBBQ0eBStbFMCIpXPKfOopDiBv4vaRw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA&ChapterSecID=249267351&BookID=2170)

**Transfer of proteins from high-density lipoprotein (HDL) to chylomicrons.**

Newly synthesized chylomicrons (nascent chylomicrons) mature as they receive apolipoproteins CII and E from HDL. HDL functions in the transfer of these apolipoproteins and also in transfer of cholesterol from peripheral tissues to the liver (see [Table V.1](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/content.aspx?legacySectionId=lieberman5-lieberman-5-lieberman-sect005-tbl001) in the introduction to [Section V](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/content.aspx?legacySectionId=lieberman5-lieberman-5-lieberman-sect005)).

## **Fate of Chylomicrons**

The triacylglycerols of the chylomicrons are digested by LPL attached to the proteoglycans in the basement membranes of endothelial cells that line the capillary walls (Fig. 29.11). LPL is produced by adipose cells, muscle cells (particularly cardiac muscle), and cells of the lactating mammary gland. The isozyme synthesized in adipose cells has a higher *K*m than the isozyme synthesized in muscle cells. Therefore, adipose LPL is more active after a meal, when chylomicrons levels are elevated in the blood. Insulin stimulates the synthesis and secretion of adipose LPL, so that after a meal, when triglyceride levels increase in circulation, LPL has been upregulated (through insulin release) to facilitate the hydrolysis of fatty acids from the triglyceride.

**FIGURE 29.11**

![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/m_lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f012_1602178814.72537.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=3sVU9CQtPWMmL-f3peoqAi5BQbkfqAc2gWBgFLAjw4Qa~URS1eSWr3qNx7S5bZOuYdo5zklH2Wqv6BQlYkhETFalKGfkAByPqGZEExCMbFH721z0Qi-7SWuuLptj1gJLcl7-OUFMMcq3oiWDpuCJOwReyA1PHlibEGv2D-HQf8h7QJu9-wpKyYbmmP5o18ly9Ss4JEKgYKfqwtYhTg4YmrfSVGf1VayuMa5koDU~zg~1-hPyMnH3ttmaYkXKg6AuMvcwgUEzvubV-EYNClimo~oCPf4WU53OpXS9GY4MzNXb6C-~IQrsQDCEqmhB7lfXCIVHqCxlxhKn7p3d62mBkQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/m_lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f012_1602178814.72537.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=3sVU9CQtPWMmL-f3peoqAi5BQbkfqAc2gWBgFLAjw4Qa~URS1eSWr3qNx7S5bZOuYdo5zklH2Wqv6BQlYkhETFalKGfkAByPqGZEExCMbFH721z0Qi-7SWuuLptj1gJLcl7-OUFMMcq3oiWDpuCJOwReyA1PHlibEGv2D-HQf8h7QJu9-wpKyYbmmP5o18ly9Ss4JEKgYKfqwtYhTg4YmrfSVGf1VayuMa5koDU~zg~1-hPyMnH3ttmaYkXKg6AuMvcwgUEzvubV-EYNClimo~oCPf4WU53OpXS9GY4MzNXb6C-~IQrsQDCEqmhB7lfXCIVHqCxlxhKn7p3d62mBkQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)

[View Original](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f012_1602178814.72537.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=K3d27Jlpm7yvaRysFMa-CzCIFE6GTf1jkr-YOKXG3wXAQQrnZr7He2Vh4cUw4MZItvfS9tsezWhPMXX54AiXK0rrNxuwgS~dCjFSIu3mx64KioabbBaXD-grayWxISLc9dvIAXjoO3NgLqszCVmzlFfDcqms5h2LbaVCiZaqBaOD87LIAKtXwuZccvhj8o7w2p~C2u~TC4HphrlzAgy7Y1dVUZjADj-5lBjFnec5JKY53hxvtK1G~jPYDWCNuyxEekSsaK2Okx4~rBLuBOWjl01JN9fnueulQwKgTg9gtGSFG3V~GQ4tWTcL5X6rvmrO6BpBD9oorO0Qijil3NhTCQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)[Download Slide (.ppt)](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/downloadimage.aspx?sec=249267422&image=https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/2170/lieberman9781496324818-ch029_f012_1602178814.72537.jpeg?Expires=1652063765&Signature=K3d27Jlpm7yvaRysFMa-CzCIFE6GTf1jkr-YOKXG3wXAQQrnZr7He2Vh4cUw4MZItvfS9tsezWhPMXX54AiXK0rrNxuwgS~dCjFSIu3mx64KioabbBaXD-grayWxISLc9dvIAXjoO3NgLqszCVmzlFfDcqms5h2LbaVCiZaqBaOD87LIAKtXwuZccvhj8o7w2p~C2u~TC4HphrlzAgy7Y1dVUZjADj-5lBjFnec5JKY53hxvtK1G~jPYDWCNuyxEekSsaK2Okx4~rBLuBOWjl01JN9fnueulQwKgTg9gtGSFG3V~GQ4tWTcL5X6rvmrO6BpBD9oorO0Qijil3NhTCQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA&ChapterSecID=249267351&BookID=2170)

**Fate of chylomicrons.**

Nascent chylomicrons are synthesized in intestinal epithelial cells, secreted into the lymph, pass into the blood, and become mature chylomicrons (see Fig. 29.10). On capillary walls in adipose tissue and muscle, lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activated by apoCII digests the triacylglycerols (TG) of chylomicrons to fatty acids and glycerol. Fatty acids (FA) are oxidized in muscle or stored in adipose cells as triacylglycerols. The remnants of the chylomicrons are taken up by the liver by receptor-mediated endocytosis (through recognition of apoE on the remnant). Lysosomal enzymes within the hepatocyte digest the remnants, releasing the products into the cytosol.

<aside>
💡 One manner in which individuals can lose weight is to inhibit the activity of pancreatic lipase. This results in reduced fat digestion and absorption and a reduced caloric yield from the diet. The drug orlistat is a chemically synthesized derivative of lipostatin, a natural lipase inhibitor found in certain bacteria. The drug works in the intestinal lumen and forms a covalent bond with the active-site serine residues of both gastric and pancreatic lipase, thereby inhibiting their activities. Nondigested triglycerides are not absorbed by the intestine and are eliminated in the feces. Under normal use of the drug, approximately 30% of dietary fat absorption is inhibited. Because excessive nondigested fat in the intestines can lead to gastrointestinal distress related to excessive intestinal gas formation, individuals who take this drug need to follow a diet with reduced daily intake of fat, which should be evenly distributed among the meals of the day.

</aside>

The fatty acids released from triacylglycerols by LPL are not very soluble in water. They become soluble in blood by forming complexes with the protein albumin. The major fate of the fatty acids is storage as triacylglycerol in adipose tissue. However, these fatty acids also may be oxidized for energy in muscle and other tissues (see Fig. 29.11). The LPL in the capillaries of muscle cells has a lower *K*m than adipose LPL. Thus, muscle cells can obtain fatty acids from blood lipoproteins whenever they are needed for energy, even if the concentration of the lipoproteins is low.

The glycerol released from chylomicron triacylglycerols by LPL may be used for triacylglycerol synthesis in the liver in the fed state.

The portion of a chylomicron that remains in the blood after LPL action is known as a *chylomicron remnant*. The remnant has lost many of the apoCII molecules bound to the mature chylomicron, which exposes apoE. This remnant binds to receptors on hepatocytes (the major cells of the liver), which recognize apoE, and is taken up by the process of endocytosis. Lysosomes fuse with the endocytic vesicles, and the chylomicron remnants are degraded by lysosomal enzymes. The products of lysosomal digestion (e.g., fatty acids, amino acids, glycerol, cholesterol, phosphate) can be reused by the cell.

<aside>
💡 Heparin is a complex polysaccharide (a glycosaminoglycan) that is a component of proteoglycans (see [Chapter 47](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/content.aspx?legacySectionId=lieberman5-lieberman-5-lieberman-ch047)). Isolated heparin is frequently used as an anticoagulant because it binds to antithrombin III (ATIII), and the activated ATIII then binds factors necessary for clotting and inhibits them from working. As LPL is bound to the capillary endothelium through binding to proteoglycans, heparin also can bind to LPL and dislodge it from the capillary wall. This leads to loss of LPL activity and an increase of triglyceride content in the blood.

</aside>