# Pharmacology and toxicology: Pharmacokinetics of nitrates

Created time: April 11, 2022 3:55 PM

****Pharmacokinetics****

The liver contains a high-capacity organic nitrate reductase that removes nitrate groups in a stepwise fashion from the parent molecule and ultimately inactivates the drug. Therefore, oral bioavailability of the traditional organic nitrates (eg, **[nitroglycerin](https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/drugs.aspx?GbosID=426816)** and **isosorbide dinitrate**) is low (typically <10–20%). For this reason, the sublingual route, which avoids the first-pass effect, is preferred for achieving a therapeutic blood level rapidly. [Nitroglycerin](https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/drugs.aspx?GbosID=426816) and isosorbide dinitrate both are absorbed efficiently by the sublingual route and reach therapeutic blood levels within a few minutes. However, the total dose administered by this route must be limited to avoid excessive effect; therefore, the total duration of effect is brief (15–30 minutes). When much longer duration of action is needed, oral preparations can be given that contain an amount of drug sufficient to result in sustained systemic blood levels of the parent drug plus active metabolites. **Pentaerythritol tetranitrate** (PETN) is another organic nitrate that has been promoted for oral use as a “long-acting” nitrate (>6 hours). This drug has also been reported to reduce pulmonary hypertension in experimental animals. Other routes of administration available for [nitroglycerin](https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/drugs.aspx?GbosID=426816) include transdermal and buccal absorption from slow-release preparations (described below).

**Amyl nitrite** and related nitrites are highly volatile liquids. Amyl nitrite is available in fragile glass ampules packaged in a protective cloth covering. The ampule can be crushed with the fingers, resulting in rapid release of vapors inhalable through the cloth covering. The inhalation route provides very rapid absorption and, like the sublingual route, avoids the hepatic first-pass effect. Because of its unpleasant odor and extremely short duration of action, amyl nitrite is now obsolete for angina.

Once absorbed, the unchanged organic nitrate compounds have half-lives of only 2–8 minutes. The partially denitrated metabolites have much longer half-lives (up to 3 hours). Of the [nitroglycerin](https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/drugs.aspx?GbosID=426816) metabolites (two dinitroglycerins and two mononitro forms), the 1,2-dinitro derivative has significant vasodilator efficacy and probably provides most of the therapeutic effect of orally administered [nitroglycerin](https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/drugs.aspx?GbosID=426816). The 5-mononitrate metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate is an active metabolite of the latter drug and is available for oral use as **isosorbide mononitrate.** It has a bioavailability of 100%.

Excretion, primarily in the form of glucuronide derivatives of the denitrated metabolites, is largely by way of the kidney.