# Robbins: Clinical manifestations of renal diseases

Created time: May 13, 2022 9:14 AM

## Clinical Manifestations of Renal Diseases

The clinical manifestations of renal disease can be grouped into reasonably well-defined syndromes. Some are unique to glomerular diseases, and others are present in diseases that affect any one of the components.

- *Azotemia* is a biochemical abnormality that refers to an elevation of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels, and is related largely to a decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Azotemia is a consequence of many renal disorders, but it also arises from extrarenal disorders. It is a typical feature of both acute and chronic kidney injury. *Prerenal azotemia* is encountered when there is hypoperfusion of the kidneys that impairs renal function in the absence of parenchymal damage. It may be caused by hypotension, excessive fluid losses from any cause, or if the effective intravascular volume is decreased due to shock, volume depletion, congestive heart failure, or cirrhosis of the liver. *Postrenal azotemia* is seen whenever urine flow is obstructed distal to the kidney. Relief of the obstruction is followed by correction of the azotemia.
- When azotemia leads to clinical signs and symptoms associated with biochemical abnormalities, it is termed *uremia* . Uremia is characterized not only by failure of renal excretory function but also by a host of metabolic and endocrine alterations resulting from renal damage. Uremic patients frequently manifest secondary involvement of the gastrointestinal system (e.g., uremic gastroenteritis), peripheral nerves (e.g., peripheral neuropathy), and heart (e.g., uremic fibrinous pericarditis).
- *Nephritic syndrome* is a clinical entity caused by inflammatory glomerular disease and is dominated by the acute onset of either grossly visible hematuria (red blood cells in urine) or microscopic hematuria with dysmorphic red cells and red cell casts on urinalysis, diminished GFR, mild to moderate proteinuria, and hypertension. It is the classic presentation of acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. *Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis* (RPGN) is a form of nephritic syndrome in which there is rapid decline in GFR (within hours to days).
- *Nephrotic syndrome,* also due to glomerular disease, is characterized by heavy proteinuria (more than 3.5 g/day), hypoalbuminemia, severe edema, hyperlipidemia, and lipiduria (lipid in the urine). The clinical features of nephritis and the nephrotic syndrome are discussed in more detail later.
- *Asymptomatic hematuria or proteinuria,* or a combination of these two, is usually a manifestation of subtle or mild glomerular abnormalities.
- *Acute kidney injury* (previously called acute renal failure) is characterized by rapid decline in GFR (within hours to days) with concurrent dysregulation of fluid and electrolyte balance, and retention of metabolic waste products normally excreted by the kidney including urea and creatinine. In its most severe forms, it is manifested by *oliguria* or *anuria* (reduced or no urine flow). It can result from glomerular, interstitial, vascular, or acute tubular injury (ATI).
- *Chronic kidney disease* (previously called chronic renal failure) is defined as the presence of a diminished GFR that is persistently less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m 2 for at least 3 months, from any cause, and/or persistent albuminuria. It may present with a clinically silent decline in renal excretory function in milder forms or with prolonged symptoms and signs of uremia in more severe cases. It is the end result of all chronic renal parenchymal diseases.
- *In end-stage renal disease,* the GFR is less than 5% of normal; this is the terminal stage of uremia.
- *Renal tubular defects* are dominated by polyuria (excessive urine formation), nocturia, and electrolyte disorders (e.g., metabolic acidosis). They are the result of diseases that either directly affect tubular structures (e.g., the nephronophthisis) or cause defects in specific tubular functions. The latter can be inherited (e.g., familial nephrogenic diabetes, cystinuria, renal tubular acidosis) or acquired (e.g., lead nephropathy).
- *Urinary tract obstruction* and *renal tumors* have varied clinical manifestations based on the specific anatomic location and nature of the lesion. *Urinary tract infection* is characterized by bacteriuria and pyuria (bacteria and leukocytes in the urine). The infection may be symptomatic or asymptomatic, and it may affect the kidney *(pyelonephritis)* or the bladder *(cystitis).*
- *Nephrolithiasis (renal stones)* is manifested by spasms of severe pain (renal colic) and hematuria, often with recurrent stone formation.

Chronic kidney disease is estimated to affect 11% of all adults in the United States, with a particular predominance among older adults. It is the end result of a variety of renal diseases, but most commonly diabetes and hypertension, and the major cause of death from renal disease. The evolution from normal renal function to symptomatic chronic kidney injury progresses through a series of stages that are defined by measures of serum creatinine from which estimates of reduction in GFR are derived. Chronic kidney disease causes significant systemic abnormalities, which are listed in [Table 20.1](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/t0010) .

**KEY CONCEPTS**

**Clinical Manifestations of Renal Diseases**

- Azotemia is the biochemical manifestation of acute or chronic kidney injury and is characterized by elevated BUN or alternately by an elevated serum creatinine. It reflects a reduction in GFR.
- Kidney injury that results in azotemia can be either acute or chronic. Acute kidney injury can be reversible or progress to chronic kidney disease, which is generally irreversible.
- One major manifestation of kidney injury is the nephrotic syndrome, in which injury to the glomerulus results in abnormal filtration, leading to heavy proteinuria, edema, and metabolic disturbances.
- Nephritic syndromes are those in which hematuria, azotemia, hypertension, and sub-nephrotic proteinuria are the major manifestations.
- Diseases involving the tubules and interstitium may have clinical manifestations of the nephritic syndrome, or of specific defects in tubular function, or of acute or chronic kidney disease without more specific defining features.