# Robbins: Characteristics of Benign and Malignant neoplasm

Created time: April 13, 2022 2:26 PM

### Summary

**KEY CONCEPTS**

**Characteristics of Benign and Malignant Neoplasms**

- Benign and malignant tumors can be distinguished from one another based on the degree of differentiation, local invasiveness, and distant spread.
- Benign tumors resemble the tissue of origin and are well differentiated; malignant tumors are less well differentiated or completely undifferentiated (anaplastic).
- Benign tumors are more likely to retain functions of their cells of origin, whereas malignant tumors sometimes acquire unexpected functions due to derangements in differentiation.
- Benign tumors are slow growing, while malignant tumors generally grow faster.
- Benign tumors are circumscribed and have a capsule; malignant tumors are poorly circumscribed and invade surrounding normal tissues.
- Benign tumors remain localized at the site of origin; malignant tumors metastasize to distant sites. Carcinomas tend to spread via lymphatics, whereas sarcomas prefer the hematogenous route.

Table 7.2

Comparisons Between Benign and Malignant Tumors

# Characteristics of Benign and Malignant Neoplasms

The differentiation between benign and malignant tumors is one of the most important distinctions a pathologist can make, as nothing is more important to an individual with a tumor than being told, “It is benign.” Although an innocent face may mask an ugly nature, benign and malignant tumors usually can be distinguished on the basis of various histologic and anatomic features (described later). Malignant tumors also tend to grow more rapidly than benign tumors, but there are so many exceptions that growth rate is not a reliable discriminator between benignity and malignancy. In fact, even cancers exhibit remarkably varied growth rates, from slow-growing tumors associated with survival for many years, often without treatment, to rapidly growing tumors that may be lethal within months or weeks.

### Differentiation and Anaplasia

**Differentiation refers to the extent to which neoplastic parenchymal cells resemble the corresponding normal parenchymal cells, both morphologically and functionally; lack of differentiation is called *anaplasia* .** In general, benign tumors are well differentiated ( [Figs. 7.4](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0025) and [7.5](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0030) ). The neoplastic cells of a lipoma, a proliferation of benign adipocytes, may so closely resemble normal adipocytes as to be unrecognizable as a tumor by microscopic examination. Only the growth of these cells into a discrete mass discloses their neoplastic nature. One may get so close to the tree that one loses sight of the forest. In well-differentiated benign tumors, mitoses are usually rare and are of normal configuration.

Open full size imageFigure 7.4Leiomyoma of the uterus. This benign, well-differentiated tumor contains interlacing bundles of neoplastic smooth muscle cells that are virtually identical in appearance to normal smooth muscle cells in the myometrium.

Open full size imageFigure 7.5Benign tumor (adenoma) of the thyroid. Note the normal-looking (well-differentiated), colloid-filled thyroid follicles.(Courtesy Dr. Trace Worrell, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-005-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=RSJzSZEp2PXZWvXXviN3YEeMsiI6wHyihvlnkMls3j2BN9hee3y3Mwlds1bpjYBnF5DcB-lkizpNQl2HaMBZ54T9nuJN69RDWVXvo6IeU0bifTFZZnGcxroYNh0vU8wMyAjMJvV-LexPrV56K0chzZcqBv4eoZfJqik0zrIBg%7EM_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-005-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=RSJzSZEp2PXZWvXXviN3YEeMsiI6wHyihvlnkMls3j2BN9hee3y3Mwlds1bpjYBnF5DcB-lkizpNQl2HaMBZ54T9nuJN69RDWVXvo6IeU0bifTFZZnGcxroYNh0vU8wMyAjMJvV-LexPrV56K0chzZcqBv4eoZfJqik0zrIBg%7EM_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-004-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=N5eR9irPu%7ElC6ULYVRlt1MPZirITfbGnjbRFDd1EHe0zsnSf1I6Emc7mwnWiqh%7Edd%7ECdt4%7E3ckeVDg6H13IS1TqbdkfhWdt9Y0Lif7-eqxV93vX1v-m22CMTM60nTALulJqVjBZ7W5TQ0fR%7EC0Ol34yQa01sou7h2PAw%7EfrctgE_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-004-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=N5eR9irPu%7ElC6ULYVRlt1MPZirITfbGnjbRFDd1EHe0zsnSf1I6Emc7mwnWiqh%7Edd%7ECdt4%7E3ckeVDg6H13IS1TqbdkfhWdt9Y0Lif7-eqxV93vX1v-m22CMTM60nTALulJqVjBZ7W5TQ0fR%7EC0Ol34yQa01sou7h2PAw%7EfrctgE_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

By contrast, **most malignant neoplasms exhibit morphologic alterations that betray their potential for aggressive behavior** . In well-differentiated tumors, these features may be quite subtle. Well-differentiated adenocarcinomas of the thyroid, for example, form normal-appearing follicles, and some squamous cell carcinomas contain cells that appear identical to normal squamous epithelial cells ( [Fig. 7.6](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0035) ). The malignant nature of such tumors is revealed by invasion of adjacent tissues and their ability to metastasize. At the other end of the spectrum lie highly anaplastic, poorly differentiated tumors exhibiting little or no evidence of differentiation ( [Fig. 7.7](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0040) ), a morphologic appearance that is highly predictive of malignant behavior. In between these two extremes lie tumors that are loosely referred to as moderately well differentiated ( [Fig. 7.8](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0045) ).

Open full size imageFigure 7.6Well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. The tumor cells are strikingly similar to normal squamous epithelial cells, with intercellular bridges and nests of keratin pearls *(arrow).*(Courtesy Dr. Trace Worrell, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-006-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=Q49RvqO0E45YJnNiM6KTRKS2M-%7EvYf5qMM5ErApGNJBlmKLuo34V18CqRuOMY%7E8b5-vdnuhYqclTr5G9vVqvpp%7EArrfeA9iKpGlZKrSJ5yLi-SwYkoXH6oqfzr-KqG3m0OpSFoy4eZts3ZoNRFxCaFqbZliBcTN%7En9UB9xliKmQ_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-006-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=Q49RvqO0E45YJnNiM6KTRKS2M-%7EvYf5qMM5ErApGNJBlmKLuo34V18CqRuOMY%7E8b5-vdnuhYqclTr5G9vVqvpp%7EArrfeA9iKpGlZKrSJ5yLi-SwYkoXH6oqfzr-KqG3m0OpSFoy4eZts3ZoNRFxCaFqbZliBcTN%7En9UB9xliKmQ_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

Open full size imageFigure 7.7Anaplastic tumor showing cellular and nuclear variation in size and shape. The prominent cell in the center field has an abnormal tripolar spindle.

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-007-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=Ok1-9cYlvGsscIelc9tJMN0l%7EW7NTcmowLXfjo2x623GyXLnoS7mSxva-%7E0Fjk62zaLzznZZkNYkJaEQrK9yueTbEFngRuhZqNubcpIE%7EsyU-O7rFLgIZIV8ipLOTqIpnaBrdTSGp5Bfy2EWxmuBl8Bvvt6kxqOD0ORX%7EfxIHBY_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-007-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=Ok1-9cYlvGsscIelc9tJMN0l%7EW7NTcmowLXfjo2x623GyXLnoS7mSxva-%7E0Fjk62zaLzznZZkNYkJaEQrK9yueTbEFngRuhZqNubcpIE%7EsyU-O7rFLgIZIV8ipLOTqIpnaBrdTSGp5Bfy2EWxmuBl8Bvvt6kxqOD0ORX%7EfxIHBY_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

Open full size imageFigure 7.8Malignant tumor (adenocarcinoma) of the colon. Note that compared with the well-formed and normal-looking glands characteristic of a benign tumor, the cancerous glands are irregular in shape and size and do not resemble the normal colonic glands. This tumor is considered moderately well differentiated because gland formation is seen. The malignant glands have invaded the muscular layer of the colon.(Courtesy Dr. Trace Worrell, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-008-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=bK4tq81mF4%7EScgeMG4PJBjq2rhT1xhFOsyFHv9CQ4We4%7EeRgEjuHcnVHFpLZ2LartG9fW6yAZ6C6nMp82eVh67FWxiKoHQMbhmUsiLQQY8L1c0MfsoANTOg%7EcK6AzsNXWnFZyEOazQ1-P0d2sJQ606glEAnZUU08t2%7EV7FptN1I_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-008-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=bK4tq81mF4%7EScgeMG4PJBjq2rhT1xhFOsyFHv9CQ4We4%7EeRgEjuHcnVHFpLZ2LartG9fW6yAZ6C6nMp82eVh67FWxiKoHQMbhmUsiLQQY8L1c0MfsoANTOg%7EcK6AzsNXWnFZyEOazQ1-P0d2sJQ606glEAnZUU08t2%7EV7FptN1I_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

In addition to anaplasia, cancer cells often exhibit other telltale morphologic changes:

- *Pleomorphism.* Pleomorphism refers to variation in cell size and shape. Thus, cells within the same tumor are not uniform, but range from small cells with an undifferentiated appearance to *tumor giant cells* many times larger than their neighbors. Some tumor giant cells possess only a single huge polymorphic nucleus, while others may have two or more large, hyperchromatic nuclei ( [Fig. 7.9](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0050) ). These giant cells are not to be confused with inflammatory Langhans or foreign body giant cells, which are derived from macrophages and contain many small, normal-appearing nuclei.
    
    Open full size imageFigure 7.9Pleomorphic tumor of the skeletal muscle (rhabdomyosarcoma). Note the marked cellular and nuclear pleomorphism, hyperchromatic nuclei, and tumor giant cells.(Courtesy Dr. Trace Worrell, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)
    
    ![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-009-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=AcfNRM9xITtMmnqZ5grf7e3ywxiBLx3sHOTLvccJPG5NR1vxSpDKPWSQXqeUYzA1kogo41dJMVYQS5Hd4WMnEQGq2rGjKYz4j8usbibgKA3PMxuC3UqUg1n-DJYxkuEZU6xCtd5xOOsmyJ7paBxRUE0geK%7EVEvgVEMDXKto9Lk8_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-009-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=AcfNRM9xITtMmnqZ5grf7e3ywxiBLx3sHOTLvccJPG5NR1vxSpDKPWSQXqeUYzA1kogo41dJMVYQS5Hd4WMnEQGq2rGjKYz4j8usbibgKA3PMxuC3UqUg1n-DJYxkuEZU6xCtd5xOOsmyJ7paBxRUE0geK%7EVEvgVEMDXKto9Lk8_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)
    
- *Abnormal nuclear morphology.* Characteristically, cancer cells have nuclei that are disproportionately large, with a nuclear-to-cytoplasm ratio that may approach 1 : 1 instead of the normal 1 : 4 to 1 : 6. The nuclear shape is variable and often irregular, and the chromatin is often coarsely clumped and distributed along the nuclear membrane or more darkly stained than normal *(hyperchromatic).* Abnormally large nucleoli are also commonly seen.
- *Mitoses.* Unlike benign tumors and some well-differentiated malignant neoplasms, undifferentiated cancers often contain many cells in mitosis, reflecting their high rate of proliferation. The presence of mitoses, however, does not equate with malignancy *.* For example, cells in mitosis are often seen in normal tissues exhibiting rapid turnover, such as the epithelial lining of the gut and nonneoplastic proliferations such as hyperplasias. More important as a morphologic feature of malignancy are *atypical, bizarre mitotic figures* (see [Fig. 7.8](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0045) ).
- *Loss of polarity.* In addition to cytologic abnormalities, the orientation of anaplastic cells with respect to each other or to supporting structures like basement membranes is markedly disturbed. Sheets or large masses of tumor cells grow in a disorganized fashion.
- *Other changes.* While growing tumor cells must have a blood supply, the vascular stroma is often insufficient; as a result, many rapidly growing cancers develop areas of ischemic necrosis *.*

As one might surmise, well-differentiated transformed cells have a greater likelihood of retaining the functional capabilities of their normal counterparts. Benign tumors are almost always well differentiated and often retain normal functions, as do many well-differentiated cancers. Thus, well-differentiated tumors of endocrine glands frequently secrete hormones characteristic of their origin into the blood, where they can be detected and quantified to diagnose and follow the response of such tumors to treatment. Similarly, well-differentiated squamous cell carcinomas synthesize keratin, and well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas elaborate bile. By contrast, highly anaplastic undifferentiated tumors typically lose the specialized functional activities of their tissue of origin, but sometimes acquire new and unanticipated functions. Thus some malignant tumors express fetal proteins that are not produced by their normal adult counterparts, while others express proteins that are normally found only in other types of cells. For example, bronchogenic carcinomas may produce corticotropin, parathyroid-like hormone, insulin, glucagon, and other hormones, giving rise to paraneoplastic syndromes (described later).

## Metaplasia, Dysplasia, and Carcinoma In Situ

These terms describe morphologically recognizable changes in differentiation that variously represent an adaptation to chronic injury (metaplasia), a premalignant change (dysplasia), or a cancer that has yet to invade (carcinoma in situ).

- *Metaplasia* is defined as the replacement of one type of cell with another type ( [Chapter 2](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9780323531139000029?scrollTo=%23c00002) ). Metaplasia is nearly always found in association with tissue damage, repair, and regeneration. Often the replacing cell type is better suited to some alteration in the local environment. For example, in Barrett esophagus, gastroesophageal reflux damages the squamous epithelium of the esophagus, leading to its replacement by glandular (gastric or intestinal) epithelium better suited to an acidic environment. Unfortunately, the metaplastic epithelium is prone to malignant transformation. The same is true of squamous metaplasia of the bronchial epithelium in chronic smokers, often a prelude to the development of lung cancer.

- *Dysplasia* is a term that literally means “disordered growth.” It is encountered principally in epithelial cells and is recognized on the basis of several morphologic changes. Dysplastic cells may exhibit considerable pleomorphism and often contain large hyperchromatic nuclei with a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio. Dysplastic epithelial surfaces also typically show architectural disarray and a loss of orderly differentiation. For example, in dysplastic squamous epithelium the normal progressive maturation of tall cells in the basal layer to flattened squames on the surface may fail in part or entirely, leading to replacement of the epithelium by basal-like cells with hyperchromatic nuclei. In addition, mitotic figures are more abundant than in the normal squamous epithelium and may be seen throughout dysplastic epithelium, rather than being confined to the basal layer, as is the normal case.
- *Carcinoma in situ.* When dysplasia is severe and involves the full thickness of the epithelium but the lesion does not penetrate the basement membrane, it is referred to as *carcinoma in situ* ( [Fig. 7.10](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0055) ). Carcinoma in situ is often seen in the skin, breast, bladder, and uterine cervix. In situ epithelial cancers display all of the cytologic features of malignancy and unless treated have high probability of progression to invasive cancers.
    
    Open full size imageFigure 7.10(A) Carcinoma in situ. Low-power view shows that the epithelium is entirely replaced by atypical dysplastic cells. There is no orderly differentiation of squamous cells. The basement membrane is intact, and there is no tumor in the subepithelial stroma. (B) High-power view of another region shows failure of normal differentiation, marked nuclear and cellular pleomorphism, and numerous mitotic figures extending toward the surface.
    
    ![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-010-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=Afh2FGp9AtjpSfQdgpx8ZM8VEeH0cFN%7ET7dNSlQ5UGtjcO86bBYF-wBkZtDr3BzecxiNO87NWORQCGctRP0cxjAhsD-%7EjficRLTrn-xKzTpr0UzPDpcMkPOTAJ7wRVEa1KqIkXYKBwJKUSYBklXFBpz0j7W2UKmP4oBR3HpqVE8_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-010-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=Afh2FGp9AtjpSfQdgpx8ZM8VEeH0cFN%7ET7dNSlQ5UGtjcO86bBYF-wBkZtDr3BzecxiNO87NWORQCGctRP0cxjAhsD-%7EjficRLTrn-xKzTpr0UzPDpcMkPOTAJ7wRVEa1KqIkXYKBwJKUSYBklXFBpz0j7W2UKmP4oBR3HpqVE8_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)
    

Dysplastic changes are often found adjacent to foci of invasive carcinoma, and in some situations, such as in the cervix, severe epithelial dysplasia or carcinoma in situ frequently antedates the appearance of cancer. Moreover, some mutations associated with full-blown cancer (described later) may be present in even “mild” dysplasias. Nevertheless, **although dysplasia may be a precursor to malignant transformation, it does not always progress to cancer.** With removal of inciting causes, even moderately severe dysplasias may be completely reversible. Even carcinoma in situ may persist for years before it becomes invasive. As discussed later, cancers arise by accumulation of mutations, and the time interval for evolution of full-blown cancers from in situ lesions relates most likely to the time required for accumulation of all the mutations that are needed to induce a fully malignant phenotype. Finally, it should be noted that while dysplasia often occurs in metaplastic epithelium, not all metaplastic epithelium is dysplastic.

### Local Invasion

**The growth of cancers is accompanied by progressive invasion, destruction of surrounding tissue, and eventually systemic spread, whereas nearly all benign tumors grow as cohesive, expansile masses that remain localized to their site of origin and lack the capacity to invade or metastasize to distant sites.** Because benign tumors grow and expand slowly, they usually develop a rim of compressed fibrous tissue called a capsule that separates them from the surrounding normal tissue. The tumor capsule consists of extracellular matrix (ECM) deposited by stromal cells such as fibroblasts, which are activated by hypoxic damage resulting from the pressure of the expanding tumor. Such encapsulation creates a tissue plane that makes the tumor discrete, readily palpable, movable (nonfixed), and easily excisable by surgical enucleation ( [Fig. 7.11](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0060) ). There are a few exceptions to this rule, however. For example, hemangiomas (benign neoplasms composed of tangled blood vessels) are often unencapsulated and permeate the site in which they arise (e.g., the dermis of the skin and the liver); when such lesions are extensive, they may be unresectable.

Open full size imageFigure 7.11Fibroadenoma of the breast. (A) The tan-colored, encapsulated small tumor is sharply demarcated from the whiter breast tissue. (B) Microscopic view shows that the fibrous capsule *(right)* delimits the tumor from the surrounding tissue.(B, Courtesy Dr. Trace Worrell, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-011-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=KLgULwPmiJgZOh2WL3qoaZetSElwM0hR2PfRtji6QpzdAFjvSb8AfmImn9pYkB12Np7HE4bGlr7iPPyWv6KCkJz8XRJ72j88eodMfRZW2BDvsHvIU69UqdAM6mjp315hYFs8WNbF0CTO6-URGGTYRWBmyaz7GY5-zFdJhcU53f4_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-011-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=KLgULwPmiJgZOh2WL3qoaZetSElwM0hR2PfRtji6QpzdAFjvSb8AfmImn9pYkB12Np7HE4bGlr7iPPyWv6KCkJz8XRJ72j88eodMfRZW2BDvsHvIU69UqdAM6mjp315hYFs8WNbF0CTO6-URGGTYRWBmyaz7GY5-zFdJhcU53f4_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

In contrast, malignant tumors are, in general, poorly demarcated from the surrounding normal tissue and lack well-defined cleavage planes ( [Fig. 7.12](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0065) ). Slowly expanding malignant tumors may develop an apparently enclosing fibrous capsule and push along a broad front into adjacent normal structures. However, histologic examination of such “pseudoencapsulated” masses almost always shows rows of tumor cells penetrating the margin and infiltrating adjacent structures, a crablike pattern of growth that fits the popular image of cancer.

Open full size imageFigure 7.12Invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast. (A) On cut section, the lesion is retracted and infiltrates the surrounding breast substance and would be stony hard on palpation. (B) Low-power microscopic view shows irregular infiltrative borders without a well-defined capsule and intense stromal reaction.(A, Courtesy Dr. Trace Worrell, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Tex.; B, Courtesy Dr. Susan Lester, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-012-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=ehiInGbzoHn1Ltesx2JURTW52vsJAFrphcaKxDrQm1o3Fg3H%7ET5TSax9Wm73eSCqEK4fWNmYroza7NXIlcKV3-l9Ika5r1D4mOYY0IYO-lXSRUtL8BtY7Bm9-6fwp3TD81Rksv9fkvqvvR8Pi2Hm3ZslEYPesvrw64BswQ9cobM_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-012-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=ehiInGbzoHn1Ltesx2JURTW52vsJAFrphcaKxDrQm1o3Fg3H%7ET5TSax9Wm73eSCqEK4fWNmYroza7NXIlcKV3-l9Ika5r1D4mOYY0IYO-lXSRUtL8BtY7Bm9-6fwp3TD81Rksv9fkvqvvR8Pi2Hm3ZslEYPesvrw64BswQ9cobM_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

**Next to the development of metastases, invasiveness is the most reliable discriminator of malignant and benign tumors.** Most malignant tumors do not recognize normal anatomic boundaries. Given time, they will penetrate the wall of the colon or uterus, for example, or fungate through the surface of the skin. This invasiveness makes their complete surgical resection difficult or impossible, and even if the tumor appears well circumscribed it is necessary to remove a large margin of adjacent, apparently normal tissue to ensure complete local excision.

### Metastasis

**Metastasis is defined as the spread of a tumor to sites that are physically discontinuous with the primary tumor, an event that unequivocally marks a tumor as malignant.** The invasiveness of cancers permits them to penetrate blood vessels, lymphatics, and body cavities, providing the opportunity for spread. All malignant tumors can metastasize, but some do so very infrequently. Examples include malignant neoplasms of the glial cells in the central nervous system, called *gliomas,* and basal cell carcinomas of the skin, both of which invade early in their course but rarely metastasize. It is evident then that the properties of invasiveness and metastasis are separable. Blood cancers (leukemias and lymphomas) are a special case. These tumors are derived from cells that normally have the capacity to enter the bloodstream and travel to distant sites. As a result, leukemias and lymphomas (sometimes referred to as “liquid tumors”) are often disseminated at diagnosis and are always taken to be malignant, unlike all other tumors (so-called “solid” tumors), which are derived from cells that do not normally circulate in the bloodstream.

Overall, approximately 30% of solid tumors (excluding skin cancers other than melanomas) present as metastatic disease. In general, the likelihood of metastasis of a solid tumor correlates with other features of malignancy, including lack of differentiation, aggressive local invasion, rapid growth, and large size. There are innumerable exceptions, however. Small, well-differentiated, slow-growing lesions sometimes metastasize widely; conversely, some rapidly growing, large lesions remain localized for years. Metastasis is thus a complex and unpredictable process that involves many factors relating to both invader and host (discussed later). Metastatic spread strongly reduces the possibility of cure; hence, short of prevention of cancer, no achievement would be of greater benefit to patients than an effective means to block metastasis, with the important caveat that many tumors that kill the patient have already spread by the time of initial diagnosis.

### Pathways of Spread

**Dissemination of cancers occurs through three pathways: (1) direct seeding of body cavities or surfaces, (2) lymphatic spread, and (3) hematogenous spread.** Although iatrogenic spread of tumor cells on surgical instruments may occur—it is the reason, for example, why biopsies of testicular masses are never done—it is rare and not discussed further.

**Seeding of Body Cavities and Surfaces**

Seeding of body cavities and surfaces occurs when a malignant neoplasm penetrates into a natural “open field” lacking physical barriers. Most often involved is the peritoneal cavity ( [Fig. 7.13](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0070) ), but any body cavity—pleural, pericardial, subarachnoid, and joint spaces—may be affected. Such seeding is particularly characteristic of carcinomas arising in the ovaries, which often spread to peritoneal surfaces, producing a heavy cancerous coating. Remarkably, the tumor cells may remain confined to the surface of the abdominal viscera without penetrating into the substance. Sometimes, mucus-secreting appendiceal carcinomas or ovarian carcinomas fill the peritoneal cavity with a gelatinous neoplastic mass referred to as *pseudomyxoma peritonei* .

Open full size imageFigure 7.13Involvement of omentum by metastatic ovarian carcinoma. Innumerable nodules and more subtle “glazing” are evident due to seeding by carcinoma cells via the peritoneal cavity.(Courtesy Dr. Sarah Hill, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-013-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=N2Hd9GiViVoR4Du6JYf9HaXqDV0%7EQPTlvVZOVQEG4jrnY-lshdE89mXaHTT-AtlFDc3-gQIjm43uvEgiRQSwqf48bTA39eRmdFcJqpQYAAHOicxFeYE-xnNKfIm0-DuF%7EfEa4TslUCrk6xcH7r4OFzGn1UmaA2y3VLeZ1nOG1x0_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-013-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=N2Hd9GiViVoR4Du6JYf9HaXqDV0%7EQPTlvVZOVQEG4jrnY-lshdE89mXaHTT-AtlFDc3-gQIjm43uvEgiRQSwqf48bTA39eRmdFcJqpQYAAHOicxFeYE-xnNKfIm0-DuF%7EfEa4TslUCrk6xcH7r4OFzGn1UmaA2y3VLeZ1nOG1x0_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

**Lymphatic Spread**

**Transport through lymphatic vessels is the most common pathway for the initial dissemination of carcinomas** ( [Fig. 7.14](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0075) ). Sarcomas also sometimes use this route. Tumors do not contain functional lymphatic vessels, but lymphatic vessels located at the margins of invading cancers are apparently sufficient for the lymphatic spread of tumor cells. The pattern of spread follows the natural routes of lymphatic drainage. For example, because carcinomas of the breast usually arise in the upper outer quadrants, they generally disseminate first to the axillary lymph nodes and then to infraclavicular and supraclavicular lymph nodes. Carcinomas of the lung arising in the major respiratory passages metastasize first to perihilar tracheobronchial and mediastinal lymph nodes. Local lymph nodes, however, may be bypassed—so-called skip metastasis—possibly because microscopic metastases are missed or because of variation in normal patterns of lymphatic drainage.

Open full size imageFigure 7.14Axillary lymph node with metastatic breast carcinoma. Note the aggregates of tumor cells within the substance of the node and the dilated lymphatic channel.(Courtesy Dr. Susan Lester, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-014-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=aUYqsJTpfO9mt6JR4V6hxjchsF4-PJ9EjUmQnpzG7xqTA0CEz3RhF1XIEw7rQikV39sCLGvauhfqmZSdz2o9xoqoY5l4T6P5gcDzpj4UdFDbM-VezK96kaPP3njqzPkqp0ngyDYaSFrnjQl-maYHmWlMDCk6sOdWjHAnFQgKoi8_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-014-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=aUYqsJTpfO9mt6JR4V6hxjchsF4-PJ9EjUmQnpzG7xqTA0CEz3RhF1XIEw7rQikV39sCLGvauhfqmZSdz2o9xoqoY5l4T6P5gcDzpj4UdFDbM-VezK96kaPP3njqzPkqp0ngyDYaSFrnjQl-maYHmWlMDCk6sOdWjHAnFQgKoi8_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

In breast cancer, axillary lymph node examination is used to determine the prognosis and select the most suitable therapeutic options. To avoid the surgical morbidity associated with a full axillary lymph node dissection, biopsy of sentinel nodes is often used to assess the presence or absence of metastatic lesions. **A sentinel lymph node is defined as “the first node in a regional lymphatic basin that receives lymph flow from the primary tumor.”** Sentinel node mapping can be done by injection of radiolabeled tracers or colored dyes, and examination of frozen sections of the sentinel lymph node performed during surgery can guide the surgeon to the appropriate therapy. Sentinel node examination has also been used to assess the spread of melanomas, colon cancers, and other tumors.

In many cases the regional nodes serve as effective barriers against further dissemination of the tumor, at least for a while. Conceivably, after arrest within the node the cells may be destroyed by a tumor-specific immune response. The immune response to tumor cells or antigens in draining lymph nodes may lead to enlargement (hyperplasia) of the nodes. Thus, enlarged lymph nodes do not always harbor metastases, which can be assessed definitively only by microscopic examination.

**Hematogenous Spread**

**Hematogenous spread is typical of sarcomas but is also seen with carcinomas** . In general, histologic evidence of penetration of small vessels at the site of the primary neoplasm is an ominous feature associated with hematogenous metastasis. The involved vessels are usually small veins, as arteries, with their thicker walls, are more resistant to penetration. Arterial spread may occur, however, when tumor cells pass through pulmonary capillary beds or pulmonary arteriovenous shunts or when cancers in the lung (primary or metastatic) give rise to tumor emboli.

Several factors influence the patterns of vascular metastasis. With venous invasion, the blood-borne tumor cells often come to rest in the first capillary bed they encounter. Understandably, the liver and the lungs ( [Fig. 7.15](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0080) ) are most frequently involved by hematogenous dissemination because all portal area drainage flows to the liver and all caval blood flows to the lungs. Cancers arising in close proximity to the vertebral column often embolize through the paravertebral plexus; this pathway produces frequent vertebral metastases from carcinomas of the thyroid and prostate. Nonetheless, many observations suggest that the location of the primary tumor and its natural pathways of venous drainage do not wholly explain the observed patterns of metastatic spread, which are often cancer-specific. Unfortunately, most cancers have not read pathology textbooks! The basis of tissue-specific patterns of metastasis is discussed later.

Open full size imageFigure 7.15Cancer metastasis. (A) Liver studded with metastatic cancer. (B) Microscopic view of lung metastasis. A colonic adenocarcinoma has formed a metastatic nodule in the lung.(B, Courtesy Dr. Shuji Ogino, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Mass.)

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-015-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=DuQNyruD6-to8W4cxTALnAuFa0m5PBz3%7E2KX0JklqhcTRAsG7L1lyAlYFwMRp%7E3uRWLrEUAG2XVgGUaSXlpUv6I1StJ1Hxhy3o9X1Sj1siExaQ-np4wPKh96Fuen77Y9JRMUySXC6Szakh95aU7jn%7ENgTxznP0JzbSDTov1JTKo_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-015-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=DuQNyruD6-to8W4cxTALnAuFa0m5PBz3%7E2KX0JklqhcTRAsG7L1lyAlYFwMRp%7E3uRWLrEUAG2XVgGUaSXlpUv6I1StJ1Hxhy3o9X1Sj1siExaQ-np4wPKh96Fuen77Y9JRMUySXC6Szakh95aU7jn%7ENgTxznP0JzbSDTov1JTKo_&Expires=1649833792&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

Certain cancers have a curious propensity for growth within large veins. Renal cell carcinoma often invades the branches of the renal vein and then the renal vein itself, growing in a snakelike fashion up the inferior vena cava until it sometimes reaches the right side of the heart. Similarly, hepatocellular carcinomas often penetrate portal and hepatic radicles and then grow into the main venous channels. Remarkably, such intravenous growth may not be accompanied by widespread metastasis.

The distinguishing features of benign and malignant tumors are summarized in [Table 7.2](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/t0015) and [Fig. 7.16](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0085) . Having completed our overview of the morphology and behavior of neoplasms, we now discuss the pathogenesis of neoplasia, starting with clues gleaned from studies of the epidemiology of cancer.

**KEY CONCEPTS**

**Characteristics of Benign and Malignant Neoplasms**

- Benign and malignant tumors can be distinguished from one another based on the degree of differentiation, local invasiveness, and distant spread.
- Benign tumors resemble the tissue of origin and are well differentiated; malignant tumors are less well differentiated or completely undifferentiated (anaplastic).
- Benign tumors are more likely to retain functions of their cells of origin, whereas malignant tumors sometimes acquire unexpected functions due to derangements in differentiation.
- Benign tumors are slow growing, while malignant tumors generally grow faster.
- Benign tumors are circumscribed and have a capsule; malignant tumors are poorly circumscribed and invade surrounding normal tissues.
- Benign tumors remain localized at the site of origin; malignant tumors metastasize to distant sites. Carcinomas tend to spread via lymphatics, whereas sarcomas prefer the hematogenous route.

Table 7.2

Comparisons Between Benign and Malignant Tumors

| Characteristics | Benign | Malignant |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Differentiation/anaplasia | Well differentiated; structure sometimes typical of tissue of origin | Some lack of differentiation (anaplasia); structure often atypical |
| Rate of growth | Usually progressive and slow; may come to a standstill or regress; mitotic figures rare and normal | Erratic, may be slow to rapid; mitotic figures may be numerous and abnormal |
| Local invasion | Usually cohesive, expansile, well-demarcated masses that do not invade or infiltrate surrounding normal tissues | Locally invasive, infiltrating surrounding tissue; sometimes may be misleadingly cohesive and expansile |
| Metastasis | Absent | Frequent; more likely with large undifferentiated primary tumors |

View full size

Open full size imageFigure 7.16Comparison between a benign tumor of the myometrium (leiomyoma) and a malignant tumor of the same origin (leiomyosarcoma).

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-016-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=aWy2b7DWftJj-N9qIT9tUZH0X%7EPyccLTR1DJKOzh4QyFPzX0QRDkrcXWk29vjkwRBBFo55oaFFUxnx0koz8P6Ie-JjmDosw1vdFAbVHesPxyHUvfpdrNs%7EGFYzdwWx2cKVSr7y3RvN7jO59j7AQIiupZdZo6hKqqMPRYF%7EockQQ_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000078/f007-016-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=aWy2b7DWftJj-N9qIT9tUZH0X%7EPyccLTR1DJKOzh4QyFPzX0QRDkrcXWk29vjkwRBBFo55oaFFUxnx0koz8P6Ie-JjmDosw1vdFAbVHesPxyHUvfpdrNs%7EGFYzdwWx2cKVSr7y3RvN7jO59j7AQIiupZdZo6hKqqMPRYF%7EockQQ_&Expires=1649833793&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)