# Robbins: Consequences and Complications of Myocardial infarction (MI)

Created time: April 8, 2022 12:35 PM

## Consequences and Complications of Myocardial Infarction

Extraordinary progress has been made in improving patient outcomes after acute MI. The overall in-hospital death rate for MI is approximately 7% to 8%, with STEMI patients experiencing slightly higher mortality (10%) than NSTEMI patients (6%). Unfortunately, mortality for out-of-hospital MIs is substantially worse: one-third of patients who are unfortunate enough to suffer a STEMI at home will die, usually of an arrhythmia within 1 hour of symptom onset and before they can receive medical attention. Such statistics make the rising rate of CAD in countries with limited hospital facilities all the more worrisome.

Nearly three-fourths of patients experience one or more of the following complications after an acute MI ( [Fig. 12.17](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0090) ):

- *Contractile dysfunction.* In general, MIs affect left ventricular pump function in proportion to the volume of damage. In most cases, there is some degree of left ventricular failure manifested as hypotension, pulmonary congestion, and pulmonary edema. Severe “pump failure” *(cardiogenic shock)* occurs in roughly 10% of patients with transmural MIs and typically is associated with infarcts that damage 40% or more of the left ventricle.
- *Papillary muscle dysfunction.* Although papillary muscles rupture infrequently after MI, they often are dysfunctional and can be poorly contractile as a result of ischemia, leading to postinfarct mitral regurgitation. Much later, papillary muscle fibrosis and shortening, or global ventricular dilation also can cause mitral regurgitation.
- *Right ventricular infarction.* Although isolated right ventricular infarction occurs in only 1% to 3% of MIs, the right ventricle is affected by RCA occlusions leading to posterior septal or left ventricular infarction. In either case, right-sided heart failure is a common outcome, leading to pooling of blood in the venous circulation and systemic hypotension.
- *Myocardial rupture.* Rupture complicates only 1% to 5% of MIs, but is frequently fatal when it occurs. Left ventricular free wall rupture is most common, usually resulting in rapidly fatal hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade (see [Fig. 12.17A](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0090) ). Ventricular septal rupture creates a VSD with left-to-right shunting (see [Fig. 12.17B](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0090) ), and papillary muscle rupture leads to severe mitral regurgitation (see [Fig. 12.17C](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0090) ). Rupture occurs most commonly within 3 to 7 days after infarction—the time in the healing process when lysis of necrotic myocardium is maximal and when much of the infarct has been converted to soft, friable granulation tissue. Risk factors for free wall rupture include age older than 60 years, anterior or lateral wall infarctions, female gender, lack of left ventricular hypertrophy, and first MI (because scarring associated with prior MIs tends to limit the risk for myocardial tearing).
- *Arrhythmias.* MIs lead to myocardial irritability and conduction disturbances that can cause sudden death. Approximately 90% of patients develop some form of rhythm disturbance, with the incidence being higher in STEMIs versus NSTEMIs. MI-associated arrhythmias include heart block of variable degree (including asystole), bradycardia, supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, ventricular premature contractions or ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. The risk for serious arrhythmias (e.g., ventricular fibrillation) is greatest in the first hour and declines thereafter.
- *Pericarditis.* Transmural MIs can elicit a fibrinohemorrhagic pericarditis; this is an epicardial manifestation of the underlying myocardial inflammation (see [Fig. 12.17D](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0090) ). Heralded by anterior chest pain and a pericardial friction rub, pericarditis typically appears 2 to 3 days after infarction and then gradually resolves over the next few days. Extensive infarcts or severe pericardial inflammation occasionally can lead to large effusions or can organize to form dense adhesions that eventually manifest as a constrictive lesion. Rarely patients can develop an intense pericarditis weeks after MI *(Dressler syndrome)* due to formation of antibodies against damaged myocardium.
- *Chamber dilation.* Because of the weakening of necrotic muscle, there may be disproportionate stretching, thinning, and dilation of the infarcted region (especially with anteroseptal infarcts).
- *Mural thrombus.* With any infarct, the combination of attenuated myocardial contractility (causing stasis), chamber dilation, and endocardial damage (causing a thrombogenic surface) can foster mural thrombosis (see [Fig. 12.17E](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0090) ), potentially leading to left-sided thromboembolism.
- *Ventricular aneurysm.* A late complication, aneurysms of the ventricle most commonly result from a large transmural anteroseptal infarct that heals with the formation of a thinned wall of scar tissue (see [Fig. 12.17F](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0090) ). Although ventricular aneurysms frequently give rise to formation of mural thrombi, arrhythmias, and heart failure, they do not rupture.
- *Progressive heart failure.* This is discussed in the Chronic Ischemic Heart Disease section later in this chapter.

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000121/f012-017-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=JFer-F8mgQRs2THMLX15Heircm3QqtSYOLnM5A-8JS3TpEvd0T7OfhVE9KGnf84FsBvp0Z2S-bzehg-UsTVEWKTBT73cIMIDFARzirHfmF74TPwV5T3ORafwWdwr0zCA4kKG70NhcheXCrz%7E5osw3E52v%7E5cE8JemuNhx7uql6A_&Expires=1649394532&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000121/f012-017-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=JFer-F8mgQRs2THMLX15Heircm3QqtSYOLnM5A-8JS3TpEvd0T7OfhVE9KGnf84FsBvp0Z2S-bzehg-UsTVEWKTBT73cIMIDFARzirHfmF74TPwV5T3ORafwWdwr0zCA4kKG70NhcheXCrz%7E5osw3E52v%7E5cE8JemuNhx7uql6A_&Expires=1649394532&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)

Open full size imageFigure 12.17Complications of myocardial infarction. (A) Anterior myocardial rupture in an acute infarct *(arrow)* . (B) Rupture of the ventricular septum *(arrow)* . (C) Complete rupture of a necrotic papillary muscle. (D) Fibrinous pericarditis, showing a dark, roughened epicardial surface overlying an acute infarct. E, Early expansion of anteroapical infarct with wall thinning *(arrow)* and mural thrombus. F, Large apical left ventricular aneurysm *(arrow)* . The left ventricle is on the right in this apical four-chamber view of the heart.(A–E, Reproduced with permission from Schoen FJ: *Interventional and Surgical Cardiovascular Pathology: Clinical Correlations and Basic Principles,* Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders; F, Courtesy William D. Edwards, MD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.)

The risk of postinfarct complications and the prognosis of the patient depend primarily on the infarct size, location, and fraction of the wall thickness involved (subendocardial or transmural). Thus, large transmural infarcts yield a higher probability of cardiogenic shock, arrhythmias, and late CHF. Patients with anterior transmural infarcts are at greatest risk for free-wall rupture, expansion, mural thrombi, and aneurysm. In contrast, posterior transmural infarcts are more likely to be complicated by conduction blocks, right ventricular involvement, or both; when acute VSDs occur in this area they are more difficult to manage. Moreover, female gender, age older than 70 years, diabetes mellitus and previous MI are poor prognostic factors in patients with ST elevation myocardial infarcts. With subendocardial infarcts, only rarely do pericarditis, rupture, and aneurysm occur.

In addition to the sequence of repair in the infarcted tissues described earlier, the noninfarcted segments of the ventricle undergo hypertrophy and dilation; collectively, these changes are termed ventricular remodeling. The compensatory hypertrophy of noninfarcted myocardium is initially hemodynamically beneficial. However, this adaptive effect may be overwhelmed by ventricular dilation (with or without ventricular aneurysm) and increased oxygen demand, which can exacerbate ischemia and depress cardiac function. There may also be changes in ventricular shape and stiffening of the ventricle due to scar formation and hypertrophy that further diminish cardiac output. Some of these deleterious effects appear to be reduced by ACE inhibitors, which lessen the ventricular remodeling that can occur after infarction.

Long-term prognosis after MI depends on many factors, the most important of which are the residual left ventricular function and the extent of any vascular obstructions in vessels that perfuse the remaining viable myocardium. The overall total mortality within the first year can be as high as 30%; thereafter, each passing year is associated with an additional 3% to 4% mortality among survivors. Infarct prevention (through control of risk factors) in individuals who have never experienced MI (primary prevention) and prevention of reinfarction in MI survivors (secondary prevention) are important strategies that have received much attention and achieved considerable success.

The relationship of the causes, pathophysiology, and consequences of MI are summarized in [Fig. 12.18](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0095) , including the possible outcomes of chronic IHD and sudden death, discussed later.

Open full size imageFigure 12.18Schematic for the causes and outcomes of ischemic heart disease *(IHD),* showing the interrelationships among coronary artery disease, acute plaque change, myocardial ischemia, myocardial infarction, chronic IHD, congestive heart failure, and sudden cardiac death.

![https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000121/f012-018-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=VIViv9OJL2R%7Efsm5iKSZZditAcFj4hpqWIpD3rtaPBDthXPMHP0YTKilezvM3yyD7waPR%7EQjnnFtvA7%7E9EOFJ3a3rnTiqVu8qV2O4GAxr7rRKdcbYX%7EKoWZCjBcx1pDoeAlB7oucJCqhl8Pw2U3NUgqtKiKum88aaFhqB5Eh1xE_&Expires=1649394532&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ](https://d1niluoi1dd30v.cloudfront.net/C20160040871/B9780323531139000121/f012-018-9780323531139.jpg?Signature=VIViv9OJL2R%7Efsm5iKSZZditAcFj4hpqWIpD3rtaPBDthXPMHP0YTKilezvM3yyD7waPR%7EQjnnFtvA7%7E9EOFJ3a3rnTiqVu8qV2O4GAxr7rRKdcbYX%7EKoWZCjBcx1pDoeAlB7oucJCqhl8Pw2U3NUgqtKiKum88aaFhqB5Eh1xE_&Expires=1649394532&Key-Pair-Id=APKAICLNFGBCWWYGVIZQ)