# Robbins: Angina pectoris

Created time: April 7, 2022 2:17 PM

## Angina Pectoris

**Angina pectoris is characterized by paroxysmal and usually recurrent attacks of substernal or precordial chest discomfort caused by transient (15 seconds to 15 minutes) myocardial ischemia that is insufficient to induce myocyte necrosis.** The anginal pain is a consequence of the ischemia-induced release of adenosine, bradykinin, and other molecules that stimulate sympathetic and vagal afferent nerves. Three overlapping patterns of angina pectoris are recognized, caused by varying combinations of decreased perfusion, increased demand, and coronary arterial pathology. Importantly, not all ischemic events are perceived by patients *;* silent ischemia is particularly common in the geriatric population and in the setting of diabetic neuropathy.

- *Stable (typical) angina* is the most common form of angina; it is caused by an imbalance in coronary perfusion (due to chronic stenosing coronary atherosclerosis) relative to myocardial demand. Stable angina does not occur at rest, but in a given patient can be reliably induced by activities that increase the energy requirements of the heart, including physical activity, emotional excitement, or psychological stress. Angina pectoris is classically described as a crushing or squeezing substernal sensation that can radiate down the left arm or to the left jaw *(referred pain).* The pain is usually relieved by rest (decreasing demand) or by administering vasodilators, such as nitroglycerin and calcium channel blockers (thereby increasing perfusion).
- *Prinzmetal variant angina* is an uncommon form of episodic myocardial ischemia caused by coronary artery spasm. Although individuals with Prinzmetal variant angina can also have significant coronary atherosclerosis, the anginal attacks are unrelated to physical activity, heart rate, or blood pressure, and can occur at rest. Prinzmetal angina generally responds promptly to vasodilators.
- *Unstable* or *crescendo angina* refers to a pattern of increasingly frequent, prolonged (>20 min), or severe angina, precipitated by progressively lower levels of physical activity or even occurring at rest. Unstable angina is associated with plaque disruption and superimposed thrombosis, distal embolization of the thrombus, and/or vasospasm; it is an important harbinger of MI, potentially portending complete vascular occlusion.