# Ventilation-Perfusion Relationships: How Matching of Gas and Blood Determines Gas Exchange | West's Respiratory Physiology: The Essentials, 11e | Medical Education | Health Library

Created time: January 27, 2022 3:08 PM

# Ventilation-Perfusion Relationships: How Matching of Gas and Blood Determines Gas Exchange | West's Respiratory Physiology: The Essentials, 11e | Medical Education | Health Library #[[January 20th, 2022]]

- The Ventilation-Perfusion Ratio
    - So far, we have considered three of the four causes of hypoxemia: hypoventilation, diffusion, and shunt. We now come to the last cause, which is both the most common and the most difficult to understand, namely, ventilation-perfusion inequality.
    - A critical factor in maintaining efficient gas exchange and preventing hypoxemia is ensuring that lung units receive a balanced mix of ventilation and perfusion; if ventilation and blood flow are mismatched in various regions of the lung, impaired transfer of both O2 and CO2 results. The key to understanding how this happens is the ventilation-perfusion ratio. Consider a model of a lung unit (Figure 2.1) in which the uptake of O2 is being mimicked using dye and water (Figure 5.6). Powdered dye is continuously poured into the unit to represent the addition of O2 by alveolar ventilation. Water is pumped continuously through the unit to represent the blood flow that removes the O2. A stirrer mixes the alveolar contents, a process normally accomplished by gaseous diffusion. The key question is: What determines the concentration of dye (or O2) in the alveolar compartment and, therefore, in the effluent water (or blood)?
    - FIGURE 5.6  View OriginalDownload Slide (.ppt)
        
        [[lX5EdL 22 zxNmvr7dyRtRODESD r6iD3QOr7jcDyrhcVUOCAoC2bElhCoKvMuuATaQmH9RlUP4eTw0Q4tTpCQ6wPGTDYa]]
        
    - Model to illustrate how the ventilation-perfusion ratio determines the Po2 in a lung unit. Powdered dye is added by ventilation at the rate V and removed by blood flow Q to represent the factors controlling alveolar Po2. The concentration of dye is given by V/Q. (Republished with permission of John Wiley & Sons from West JB. Ventilation/Blood Flow and Gas Exchange. 5th ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell; 1990; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
    - It is clear that both the rate at which the dye is added (ventilation) and the rate at which water is pumped (blood flow) will affect the concentration of dye in the model. What may not be intuitively clear is that the concentration of dye is determined by the ratio of these rates. In other words, if dye is added at the rate of V g·min−1 and water is pumped through at Q liters·min−1, the concentration of dye in the alveolar compartment and effluent water is V/Q g·liter−1. In exactly the same way, the concentration of O2 (or, better, Po2) in any lung unit is determined by the ratio of ventilation to blood flow. This is true not only for O2 but also for CO2, N2, and any other gas that is present under steady-state conditions. This is why the ventilation-perfusion ratio plays such a key role in pulmonary gas exchange.
- 
- Effect of Altering the Ventilation-Perfusion Ratio of a Lung Unit
    - Let us take a closer look at the way alterations in the ventilation-perfusion ratio of a lung unit affect its gas exchange. Figure 5.7A shows the Po2 and Pco2 in a unit with a normal ventilation-perfusion ratio (about 1, see Figure 2.1). The inspired air has a Po2 of 150 mm Hg (Figure 5.1) and a Pco2 of 0. The mixed venous blood entering the unit has a Po2 of 40 mm Hg and a Pco2 of 45 mm Hg. The alveolar Po2 of 100 mm Hg is determined by a balance between the addition of O2 by ventilation and its removal by blood flow. The normal alveolar Pco2 of 40 mm Hg is set similarly.
    - FIGURE 5.7 Effect of altering the ventilation-perfusion ratio on the Po2 and Pco2 in a lung unit. View OriginalDownload Slide (.ppt) Effect of altering the ventilation-perfusion ratio on the Po2 and Pco2 in a lung unit. (Republished with permission of John Wiley & Sons from West JB. Ventilation/Blood Flow and Gas Exchange. 5th ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell; 1990; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.) Now suppose that the ventilation-perfusion ratio of the unit is gradually reduced by obstructing its ventilation, leaving its blood flow unchanged (Figure 5.7B). This could occur, for example, due to mucous or a tumor obstructing the airway. It is clear that the O2 in the unit will fall and the CO2 will rise, although the relative changes of these two are not immediately obvious.* However, we can easily predict what will eventually happen when the ventilation is completely abolished (ventilation-perfusion ratio of 0). Now the O2 and CO2 of alveolar gas and end-capillary blood must be the same as those of mixed venous blood. (In practice, completely obstructed units eventually collapse, but we can neglect such long-term effects at the moment.) Note that we are assuming that what happens in one lung unit out of a very large number does not affect the composition of the mixed venous blood. Suppose instead that the ventilation-perfusion ratio is increased by decreasing blood flow (Figure 5.7C). This could occur, for example, due to a blood clot partially obstructing a blood vessel, a problem known as a pulmonary embolism. Now the O2 rises and the CO2 falls, eventually reaching the composition of inspired gas when blood flow is abolished (ventilation-perfusion ratio of infinity). Thus, as the ventilation-perfusion ratio of the unit is altered, its gas composition approaches that of mixed venous blood or inspired gas. A convenient way of depicting these changes is to use the O2-CO2 diagram (Figure 5.8). In this, Po2 is plotted on the x axis, and Pco2 is plotted on the y axis. First, locate the normal alveolar gas composition, point A (Po2 = 100, Pco2 = 40). If we assume that blood equilibrates with alveolar gas at the end of the capillary (Figure 3.3), this point can equally well represent the end-capillary blood. Next find the mixed venous point Inline Image (Po2 = 40, Pco2 = 45). The bar above v means “mixed” or “mean.” Finally, find the inspired point I (Po2 = 150, Pco2 = 0). Also, note the similarities between Figures 5.7 and 5.8. FIGURE 5.8 O2-CO2 diagram showing a ventilation-perfusion ratio line. View OriginalDownload Slide (.ppt) O2-CO2 diagram showing a ventilation-perfusion ratio line. The Po2 and Pco2 of a lung unit move along this line from the mixed venous point to the inspired gas point I as the ventilation-perfusion ratio is increased (compare Figure 5.7). (Republished with permission of John Wiley & Sons from West JB. Ventilation/Blood Flow and Gas Exchange. 5th ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell; 1990; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.) The line joining Inline Image to I passing through A shows the changes in alveolar gas (and end-capillary blood) composition that can occur when the ventilation-perfusion ratio is either decreased below normal Inline Image or increased above normal (A→I). Indeed, this line indicates all the possible alveolar gas compositions in a lung that is supplied with gas of composition I and blood of composition Inline Image. For example, such a lung could not contain an alveolus with a Po2 of 70 and Pco2 of 30 mm Hg, because this point does not lie on the ventilation-perfusion line. However, this alveolar composition could exist if the mixed venous blood or inspired gas were changed so that the line then passed through this point.