# Water, Acids, Bases, and Buffers | Marks’ Basic Medical Biochemistry: A Clinical Approach, 5e | Medical Education | Health Library

Created time: January 27, 2022 3:09 PM

# Water, Acids, Bases, and Buffers | Marks’ Basic Medical Biochemistry: A Clinical Approach, 5e | Medical Education | Health Library #[[January 26th, 2022]]

- Strong and Weak Acids
    - During metabolism, the body produces a number of acids that increase the hydrogen ion concentration of the blood or other body fluids and tend to lower the pH (Table 4.2). These metabolically important acids can be classified as weak acids or strong acids by their degree of dissociation into a hydrogen ion and a base (the anion component). Inorganic acids such as sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) are strong acids that dissociate completely in solution (Fig. 4.6). Organic acids containing carboxylic acid groups (e.g., the ketone bodies acetoacetic acid and β-hydroxybutyric acid) are weak acids that dissociate to only a limited extent in water. In general, a weak acid (HA), called the conjugate acid, dissociates into a hydrogen ion and an anionic component (A−), called the conjugate base. The name of an undissociated acid usually ends in “ic acid” (e.g., acetoacetic acid), and the name of the dissociated anionic component ends in “ate” (e.g., acetoacetate). TABLE 4.2  FIGURE 4.6  Dissociation of acids. Sulfuric acid is a strong acid that dissociates into H+ ions and sulfate. The ketone bodies acetoacetic acid and β-hydroxybutyric acid are weak acids that partially dissociate into H+ and their conjugate bases. Dennis V. has ingested an unknown number of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) tablets. Acetylsalicylic acid is rapidly converted to salicylic acid in the body. The initial effect of aspirin is to produce a respiratory alkalosis caused by a stimulation of the “metabolic” central respiratory control center in the medulla. This increases the rate of breathing and the expiration of CO2. This is followed by a complex metabolic acidosis caused partly by the dissociation of salicylic acid (salicylic acid↔salicylate− + H+, pKa = ~3.5).
        
        [[]]
        
        [[qJNCLL5kBvV2oTVVGTdWpU06otI0J3SF1keN46lgW7sU4m41Fl4U0OnWHtfCHJhujde3BFmO4CsvVKNWtuT 4eeVyeSOaP0 Jt4JC4IGyBUkbEh_KALSw]]
        
        [[Q0Xu3eMFQa2T5IANMt_50IaMtT0]]
        
    - Salicylate also interferes with mitochondrial ATP production (acting as an uncoupler; see Chapter 24), resulting in increased generation of CO2 and accumulation of lactate (caused by stimulation of glycolysis; see Chapter 22) and other organic acids in the blood. Subsequently, salicylate may impair renal function, resulting in the accumulation of strong acids of metabolic origin, such as sulfuric acid and phosphoric acid. Usually, children who ingest toxic amounts of aspirin are acidotic by the time they arrive in the emergency department. The tendency of the acid (HA) to dissociate and donate a hydrogen ion to solution is denoted by its Ka, the equilibrium constant for dissociation of a weak acid (Equation 4.4). The higher the Ka, the greater is the tendency to dissociate a proton. The Ka of an acid. In the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, the formula for the dissociation constant of a weak acid is converted to a convenient logarithmic equation (Equation 4.5). The term pKa represents the negative log of Ka. If the pKa for a weak acid is known, this equation can be used to calculate the ratio of the unprotonated to the protonated form at any pH. From this equation, you can see that a weak acid is 50% dissociated at a pH equal to its pKa. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. Most of the metabolic carboxylic acids have a pKa between 2 and 5, depending on the other groups on the molecule (see Table 4.2). The pKa reflects the strength of an acid. Acids with a pKa of 2 are stronger acids than those with a pKa of 5 because, at any pH, a greater proportion is dissociated. The laboratory reported that Dianne A.’s blood pH was 7.08 (reference range = 7.37 to 7.43). What was the [H+] in her blood compared with the concentration at a normal pH of 7.4? From inspection, you can tell that her [H+] is greater than normal, but it is <10 times higher. A 10-fold change in [H+] changes the pH by 1 unit. For Di, the pH of 7.08 = −log[H+], and therefore her [H+] is 1 × 10−7.08. To calculate her [H+], express −7.08 as −8 + 0.92. The antilog to the base 10 of 0.92 is 8.3. Thus, her [H+] is 8.3 × 10−8 compared to 4.0 × 10−8 at pH 7.4, or slightly more than double the normal value.
        
        [[htkh0p0ku4MVgLA3ZcD0dXuKr1SCa6gADMXUOoiWPU9a KWdajoPY]]
        
- Buffers
    - Buffers consist of a weak acid and its conjugate base. Buffers allow a solution to resist changes in pH when hydrogen ions or hydroxide ions are added. In Figure 4.7, the pH of a solution of the weak acid acetic acid is graphed as a function of the amount of OH− that has been added. The OH− is expressed as equivalents of total acetic acid present in the dissociated and undissociated forms. At the midpoint of this curve, 0.5 equivalents of OH− have been added and half of the conjugate acid has dissociated, so [A−] equals [HA]. This midpoint is expressed in the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation as the pKa, defined as the pH at which 50% dissociation occurs. As you add more OH− ions and move to the right on the curve, more of the conjugate acid molecules (HA) dissociate to generate H+ ions, which combine with the added OH− ions to form water. Consequently, only a small increase in pH results. If you add hydrogen ions to the buffer at its pKa (moving to the left of the midpoint in Fig. 4.7), conjugate base molecules (A−) combine with the added hydrogen ions to form HA, and there is almost no fall in pH. FIGURE 4.7  Titration curve for acetic acid. HA, weak acid; pKa, the pH at which 50% dissociation occurs. As can be seen from Figure 4.7, a buffer can only compensate for an influx or removal of hydrogen ions within approximately 1 pH unit of its pKa. As the pH of a buffered solution changes from the pKa to 1 pH unit below the pKa, the ratio of [A−] to HA changes from 1:1 to 1:10. If more hydrogen ions were added, the pH would fall rapidly because relatively little conjugate base remains. Likewise, at 1 pH unit above the pKa of a buffer, relatively little undissociated acid remains. More concentrated buffers are more effective simply because they contain a greater total number of buffer molecules per unit volume that can dissociate or recombine with hydrogen ions.
        
        [[]]
        
- Metabolic Acids and Buffers
    - An average rate of metabolic activity produces roughly 22,000 mEq of acid per day. If all of this acid were dissolved at one time in unbuffered body fluids, their pH would be <1. However, the pH of the blood is normally maintained between 7.36 and 7.44 and intracellular pH at approximately 7.1 (between 6.9 and 7.4). The widest range of extracellular pH over which the metabolic functions of the liver, the beating of the heart, and conduction of neural impulses can be maintained is 6.8 to 7.8. Thus, until the acid produced from metabolism can be excreted as CO2 in expired air and as ions in the urine, it needs to be buffered in the body fluids. The major buffer systems in the body are the bicarbonate–carbonic acid buffer system, which operates principally in ECF; the hemoglobin buffer system in red blood cells; the phosphate buffer system in all types of cells; and the protein buffer system of cells and plasma.
    - **The Bicarbonate Buffer System**
        - The major source of metabolic acid in the body is the gas CO2, produced principally from fuel oxidation in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Under normal metabolic conditions, the body generates >13 mol of CO2 per day (~0.5 to 1 kg). CO2 dissolves in water and reacts with water to produce carbonic acid, H2CO3, a reaction that is accelerated by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase (Fig. 4.8). Carbonic acid is a weak acid that partially dissociates into H+ and bicarbonate anion, HCO3−.
        - 
        - FIGURE 4.8
            
            [[Teyzu0PpbdmD vf9LAPhyQgJ_ufk7wZkb3hThmywZB4c5ePjCXRw8G67Ns6Bqe50iCKdaK_CVQNDfV01ZWECbocrZo5vdSJM5rKOmYa3dE]]
            
        - Carbonic acid is both the major acid produced by the body and its own buffer. The pKa of carbonic acid itself is only 3.8, so at the blood pH of 7.4, it is almost completely dissociated and theoretically unable to buffer and generate bicarbonate. However, carbonic acid can be replenished from CO2 in body fluids and air because the concentration of dissolved CO2 in body fluids is approximately 400 times greater than that of carbonic acid. As base is added and H+ is removed, H2CO3 dissociates into hydrogen and bicarbonate ions, and dissolved CO2 reacts with H2O to replenish the H2CO3 (see Fig. 4.8). Dissolved CO2 is in equilibrium with the CO2 in air in the alveoli of the lungs, and thus, the availability of CO2 can be increased or decreased by an adjustment in the rate of breathing and the amount of CO2 expired. The pKa for the bicarbonate buffer system in the body thus combines Kh (the hydration constant for the reaction of water and CO2 to form H2CO3) with the chemical pKa to obtain a modified version of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation (Equation 4.6). To use the terms for blood components measured in the emergency department, the dissolved CO2 is expressed as a fraction of Paco2. The pKa for dissociation of bicarbonate anion (HCO3−) into H+ and carbonate (CO32-) is 9.8; therefore, only trace amounts of carbonate exist in body fluids.
        - The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation for the bicarbonate buffer system.
            - 
                
                [[ep9FnVPZ3_VvJre qt_psMlqjfoDiQIW6v31B_CbyoqdVHXvmXP55VTHRnpdVdCYaZqgWj65qq9FR_hnjvWvD1g2xBYsPfZxjjn9faUwLTVp4vyNsz09BSfoFtsfsm]]
                
- Bicarbonate and Hemoglobin in Red Blood Cells
    - The bicarbonate buffer system and hemoglobin in red blood cells cooperate in buffering the blood and transporting CO2 to the lungs. Most of the CO2 produced from tissue metabolism in the TCA cycle diffuses into the interstitial fluid and the blood plasma and then into red blood cells (Fig. 4.9, circle 1). Although no carbonic anhydrase can be found in blood plasma or interstitial fluid, the red blood cells contain high amounts of this enzyme, and CO2 is rapidly converted to carbonic acid (H2CO3) within these cells (Fig. 4.9, circle 2). As the carbonic acid dissociates (Fig. 4.9, circle 3), the H+ released is also buffered by combination with hemoglobin (Hb; Fig. 4.9, circle 4). The side chain of the amino acid histidine in hemoglobin has a pKa of 6.7 and is thus able to accept a proton. The bicarbonate anion is transported out of the red blood cells into the blood in exchange for chloride anions, and thus, bicarbonate is relatively high in the plasma (Fig. 4.9, circle 5) (see Table 4.1).
    - 
        
        [[a0tivO8lgQwe02VQu3LHCTBH1opr_P5Xdubw9iVgPAv]]
        
    - As the red blood cells approach the lungs, the direction of the equilibrium reverses. CO2 is released from the red blood cells, causing more carbonic acid to dissociate into CO2 and water and more hydrogen ions to combine with bicarbonate. Hemoglobin loses some it of its hydrogen ions, a feature that allows it to bind oxygen more readily (see Chapter 7). Thus, the bicarbonate buffer system is intimately linked to the delivery of oxygen to tissues. Bicarbonate and carbonic acid, which diffuse through the capillary wall from the blood into interstitial fluid, provide a major buffer for both plasma and interstitial fluid. However, blood differs from interstitial fluid in that the blood contains a high content of extracellular proteins, such as albumin, which contribute to its buffering capacity through amino acid side chains that are able to accept and release protons. The protein content of interstitial fluid is too low to serve as an effective buffer.